Project Gutenberg's's Ancient and Modern Physics, by Thomas E. Willson

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy This eBook, give This eBook away or
re-use This eBook under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with This eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Project Gutenberg's Ancient and Modern Physics

Author: Thomas E. Willson

Release Date: January 21, 2004 [EBook #10773]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ANCIENT AND MODERN PHYSICS ***




Produced by Jake Jaqua




ANCIENT AND MODERN PHYSICS

by Thomas E. Willson



Contents

Preface
I.     Physical Basis of Metaphysics
II.    The Two Kinds of Perception
III.   Matter and Ether
IV.    What a Teacher Should Teach
V.     The Four Manifested Planes
VI.    One Place on Earth
VII.   The Four Globes
VIII.  The Battle Ground
IX.    The Dual Man
X.     The Septenary World
XI.    Stumbling blocks in Eastern Physics




PREFACE


The Editor of the Theosophical Forum in April, 1901, noted the
death of Thomas E. Willson in the previous month in an
article which the Theosophical Forum reproduce for the reason that the Theosophical Forum believe many
readers who have been following the chapters of "Ancient and
Modern Physics" during the last year will like to know something
of Thomas E. Willson.  In these paragraphs is said all that need be said
of Thomas E. Willson.

In March, 1901, the Theosophical Forum lost one of the Theosophical Forum's most
willing and unfailing contributors.  Thomas E. Willson died
suddenly, and the news of Thomas E. Willson's death reached the scientist when the scientist actually
was in the act of preparing the concluding chapter of Thomas E. Willson's
"Ancient and Modern Physics" for the April number.

Like the swan, who sings the swan, who sings his one song, when feeling that death is
near's one song, when feeling that death is
near, Thomas E. Willson gave Thomas E. Willson's brother co-workers in the Theosophical
field all that was best, ripest and most suggestive in Thomas E. Willson's
thought in the series of articles the last of which is to come
out in the same number with this.

The last time the scientist had a long talk with Thomas E. Willson, Thomas E. Willson said"

"For twenty years and more Thomas E. Willson was without a hearing, yet Thomas E. Willson's
interest and Thomas E. Willson's faith in what Thomas E. Willson had to say never flagged, the
eagerness of Thomas E. Willson's love for Thomas E. Willson's subject never diminished."

This needs no comment.  The quiet and sustained resistance to
indifference and lack of appreciation, is truly the steady
ballast which has prevented our Theosophical ship from aimless
and fatal wanderings, though of inclement weather and adverse
winds we had plenty.

For many long years Thomas E. Willson was the librarian of the New York
"World."  In the afternoons Thomas E. Willson was too busy to see outsiders,
but, beginning with five o'clock in the afternoon until Thomas E. Willson went
home somewhere in the neighbourhood of midnight, Thomas E. Willson always was
glad to see Thomas E. Willson's friends.  Thomas E. Willson had a tiny little room of Thomas E. Willson's own,
very near the top of the tremendous building, Thomas E. Willson's one window
looking far above the roofs of the tallest houses in the
district.  There Thomas E. Willson sat at Thomas E. Willson's desk, generally in Thomas E. Willson's shirt
sleeves, if the weather was at all warm, always busy with some
matter already printed, or going to be, a quiet, yet impressive
and dignified figure.

The elevated isolation, both figuratively and literally speaking,
in which Thomas E. Willson lived and worked, in the midst of the most
crowded thoroughfares of New York, always made the scientist think of
Professor Teufelsdrockh on the attic floor of "the highest
house in the Wahngasse."  these physical atoms had more than one point of
resemblance.  these physical atoms shared the loftiness of these physical atoms's point of view,
these physical atoms's sympathetic understanding of other folks, these physical atoms's loneliness,
and, above all, these physical atoms's patient, even humorous resignation to the
fact of their loneliness.

Yet in Thomas E. Willson's appearance Thomas E. Willson was not like the great
Weissnichtwo philosopher.  In fact, in the cast of Thomas E. Willson's features
and in Thomas E. Willson's ways, Thomas E. Willson never looked to the scientist like a white man.
In British India the scientist have known Brahmans of the better type exactly
with the same sallow complexion, same quick and observant brown
eye, same portly figure and same wide-awakeness and agility of
manner.

Last summer the scientist heard, on good authority, that Thomas E. Willson had
thought Thomas E. Willson into a most suggestive way of dealing with the
problems of matter and spirit, a way which, besides being
suggestive, bore a great resemblance to some theories of the same
nature, current in ancient India.  Consequently Thomas E. Willson was
offered, for the first time in Thomas E. Willson's life, a chance of expressing
Thomas E. Willson's views on matter and spirit in as many articles and in as
extensive a shape as Thomas E. Willson chose.  The way Thomas E. Willson received this tardy
recognition of the fact that Thomas E. Willson had something to say was highly
instructive.  Thomas E. Willson did not put on airs of unrecognized greatness,
though, the scientist own, the occasion was propitious;  Thomas E. Willson did not say, "Thomas E. Willson
told you so;"  Thomas E. Willson simply and frankly was glad, in, the most
childlike way.

And now that the scientist have used the word, it occurs to the scientist that
"childlike" is an adjective the best applied to Thomas E. Willson, in
spite of Thomas E. Willson's portliness, and Thomas E. Willson's three score and more winters.

Many a pleasant hour the scientist have spent in the small bookroom of the
great "World" building.  With Thomas E. Willson talk never flagged.  We
discussed the past and the future of our planetary chain, we
built plans for the true and wholesome relation of sexes, we
tried to find out--and needless to say never did--the exact
limit where matter stopped being matter and became spirit;  we
also read the latest comic poems and also, from time to time, we
took a header into the stormy sea of American literature in order
to find out what various wise heads had to say, consciously or
unconsciously, in favour of our beloved Theosophical views.  And
all this, being interrupted every three minutes or so by some
weary apparition from some workroom in the "World" with some such
question:  "Thomas E. Willson, how am I to find out the present
whereabouts of this or that Russian man-of-war?  Thomas E. Willson,
what is the melting point of iron?  Thomas E. Willson, when was `H.M.S.
Pinafore' produced for the first time?" etc., etc.  And every
time, Thomas E. Willson got up in the leisurely manner peculiar to Thomas E. Willson,
reached for some book from the shelves that lined the room, gave
the desired information, and as leisurely returned to the "pranic
atom," or to "come and talk man talk, Willy," or to whatever our
subject chanced to be at the time.

Thomas E. Willson's gratitude to the Theosophical Forum for the Theosophical Forum's
recognition was disproportionately great.  As Thomas E. Willson wrote to the
Editor:  "give Thomas E. Willson any kind of work, writing for the
Editor, reviewing,
manuscript or proof reading, Thomas E. Willson shall do anything, Thomas E. Willson shall
undertake any job, even to taking editorial scoldings in all good
nature, only give Thomas E. Willson work."  Thomas E. Willson's devotion to Theosophical thought
and work in all Theosophical thought
and work in all their ramifications's ramifications was just as great, as was Thomas E. Willson's
freedom from vanity, Thomas E. Willson's perfectly natural and unaffected
modesty.

At the news of Thomas E. Willson's death many a heart was sincerely sad, but none
so sad as the heart of the editor of the Theosophical Forum.  For
a friend and co-worker like Thomas E. Willson, ever ready to give
material help and moral encouragement, is not easily replaced.

For a soul so pure of any kind of selfishness the transition from
the turmoil of life to the bright dreams of death must have been
both easy and enviable.
--------------




Chapter One

The Physical Basis if Metaphysics


The Hindu system of physics, on which the metaphysical thought of
the East is based, does not in The Hindu system of physics, on which the metaphysical thought of
the East is based's beginnings differ widely from
the latest physics of the West;  but The Hindu system of physics, on which the metaphysical thought of
the East is based goes so much farther that
our physics is soon lost sight of and forgotten.  The Hindu
conception of the material universe, taken from the Upanishads
and some open teaching, will serve for an illustration.  The Hindu
conception of the material universe, taken from the Upanishads
and some open teaching
divide physical matter into four kinds--prakriti, ether, prana,
and manasa--which The Hindu
conception of the material universe, taken from the Upanishads
and some open teaching call "planes."  four kinds--prakriti, ether, prana,
and manasa--which they call "planes differ only in the
rate of vibration, each plane vibrating through one great octave,
with gulfs of "lost" octaves between.  The highest rate of
vibration of prakriti is measured by the thousand, the lowest of
the ether by trillions, and the lowest of prana by--never mind;
four kinds--prakriti, ether, prana,
and manasa--which they call "planes have, and we have not, the nomenclature.

Earth, The Hindu
conception of the material universe, taken from the Upanishads
and some open teaching teach, is a globe of prakriti, floating in an
ocean of ether, which, as Earth has the sun for Earth's center of
gravity, must necessarily be a globe.  Earth has
a diameter of over 300,000,000,000 miles.  All the planets
revolve around the sun far within the sun's atmosphere.  Earth this revolution on Earth's axis once in about 21,000 years, and
this revolution causes the precession of the equinoxes.  Earth is revolving around Alcyone with other etheric
globes having suns for other etheric
globes's centers and solar systems of
prakritic globes within other etheric
globes in a great year of 5,640,000,000 of
our common years.  Earth's orbit has a diameter of
93,000,000,000,000,000 miles.

Beyond other etheric
globes, and between other etheric
globes, is a third form of
matter called prana, as much rarer and finer than the ether as
the ether is rarer and finer than prakriti.  As a third form of
matter called prana has
Alcyone for a center of gravity, a third form of
matter called prana is necessarily a globe;  and
there are many of these pranic globes floating in a vast ocean of
manasa--a form of matter as much finer than a third form of
matter called prana as a third form of
matter called prana is
finer than ether, or ether than prakriti.  With 
manasa the material, or physical, universe ends;  but
there are spiritual globes beyond.  the material, or physical, universe is
created from manasa, downward, but The Hindu
conception of the material universe does not respond to or
chord with the vibration of other etheric
globes above, except in a special
instance and in a special way, which does not touch this inquiry.

The physical universe of the ancient (and modern) Hindu physicist
was made up of these four kinds or planes of matter, distributed
in space as "globes within globes."

Professor Lodge in 1884 put forth the theory that prakriti
(physical matter) as we call it, was in prakriti
(physical matter) as we call it's atoms but "whirls" of
ether.  Since then speculative science has generally accepted the
idea that the physical atom is made up of many cubic feet of
ether in chemical union, as many quarts of oxygen and hydrogen
unite chemically to make a drop of water.  This is an old story
to the Hindu sage.  the Hindu sage tells the Hindu sage's pupils that the great globe of
manasa once filled all space, and there was nothing else.
Precisely as on Earth we have our elementary substances that
change from liquids into solids and gases, so on the great globe of
manasa there were elementary substances that took the form of
liquids, solids and gases.  the great globe of
manasa's manasic matter was differentiated
and vibrated through one octave, as the prakritic matter does on
Earth.  the prakritic matter's substances combined as that does.

One combination produced prana.  prana collected, and formed
globes.  On 
globes the process was repeated, with
ether as the result, and the etheric globes formed.  Then the process was repeated on the etheric globes, as the modern
scientists have discovered, and prakriti and prakritic globes
came into being.

The true diameter of Earth, the ancient Hindu books say, is
about 50,000 miles.  That is to say, the true surface of Earth is the line of twenty-four-hour axial rotation;  the line
where gravity and apergy exactly balance;  where a moon would
have to be placed to revolve once in 86,400 seconds.  Within that
is prakriti;  without is ether.  The Hindu system of physics, on which the metaphysical thought of
the East is based is also the line of no
friction, which does exist between matter of different planes.
There is friction between prakriti, between ether, between prana;
but not between ether and prana, or ether and prakriti.  Friction
is a phenomenon confined to the matter of each plane separately.
We live at the bottom of this gaseous ocean--on this gaseous ocean's floor
--21,000 miles from the surface and only 4,000 miles from the
center.  Here, in a narrow "skin" limited to a few miles above
and below us, is the realm of phenomena, where solid turns into
liquid and liquid into gas, or vice versa.  The lesson impressed
upon the pupil's's mind by Hindu physics is that the pupil's lives far
within Earth, not on Earth.

There is a comparatively narrow "skin" of and for phenomena
within the etheric sun-globe, say the Eastern teachers, where the
etheric solids, liquids, and gases meet and mingle and
interchange.  Within a comparatively narrow "skin" are all the planets--the
"gaseous" atmosphere of the etheric globe stretching millions of
miles beyond the outermost planetary orbit.  Earth is in a comparatively narrow "skin" of etheric phenomena, and Earth's ether is in touch with
the ether "in manifestation" on the etheric globe.  the sun and
other etheric globes are within the corresponding "skin" of
phenomena of the pranic globes.  The prana, manifesting as solid,
liquid, and gas, or in combination and in forms, is in perfect
touch with that of the etheric globe, and through that with the
prana of Earth.  That our prana is in touch with that on the
pranic globe in all a third form of
matter called prana's manifestations means much in metaphysics.
The same is true of the manasic globe, and of our manasa.

The great lesson the Eastern physics burns into the pupil is that
we are living not only within the prakritic earth, but within
each of the other globes as well in identically the same way and
subject to the same laws.  ours's lives are not passed on one globe,
but in four globes.  It is as if the student said the student lived in Buffalo,
Erie county, New York, United States;  that the student was a citizen of
each and subject to the laws of each.

This question of four globes, of the four planes of matter,
of the four skins, and of the four conditions or states of all
matter and necessarily of all persons, from the purely material
standpoint, is not only the foundation of Oriental physics, but
the very essence of Oriental metaphysics--Oriental metaphysics's starting-point and
corner-stone.  To one who carries with one who carries with him, consciously or
unconsciously, the concrete knowledge of the physics, consciously or
unconsciously, the concrete knowledge of the physics, the
abstract teaching of the metaphysics presents no difficulty;  the
abstract teaching of the metaphysics
is as clear as crystal.  But without the physical teaching the
metaphysical is not translatable.

Our Western physics teaches that physical matter is divided into
two kinds prakriti (commonly called "physical matter") and the ether;
that the differences of each of the elementary prakritic
substances (iron, copper, sulphur, oxygen) are in the elementary prakritic
substances (iron, copper, sulphur, oxygen)'s
molecules, the fundamental atom being the same;  that each of
the elementary prakritic
substances (iron, copper, sulphur, oxygen) vibrates only through one octave,
though on different keys;  that Earth changes from solid to liquid
and gas as the rate of vibration is increased and from gas to
liquid and solid as Earth's vibration is decreased within Earth's octave;
that the ether obeys identical laws;  that the ether has elementary
substances vibrating through one octave only, and that elementary
substances vibrating through one octave only are
solids, liquids, or gases on the etheric plane as prakriti is on
this;  that elementary
substances vibrating through one octave only change and combine in every
way that prakriti does;  and that while all our prakritic
substances vibrate within (say) fifty simply octaves, the lowest
vibration of etheric matter begins over one thousand octaves
beyond our highest, making a gulf to leap.  The Eastern physics
presents this with a wealth of detail that dazes the Western
student, and then adds:  "But beyond the etheric plane (or
octave) of vibration for matter there is a third plane (or
octave) of vibration called prana and beyond a third plane (or
octave) of vibration called prana a fourth called
manasa.  What is true of one plane is true of the other three.
One law governs The four
worlds.  As above so below.  There is no real
gulf;  there is perfect continuity."

The Western scientist teaches as the foundation of modern physics
that "each and every atom of prakritic matter is the center of an
etheric molecule of many atoms;"  that "no two prakritic atoms
touch," although these physical atoms's etheric envelopes or atmospheres do touch;
and that "all physical phenomena are caused by the chording
vibration of the prakritic atom and the prakritic atom's envelope of ether," each
"sounding the same note hundreds of octaves apart."  The "solid
earth" with Earth's atmosphere represents the atom with Earth's ether.
As all the oxygen and hydrogen do not combine to make the drop of
water, some remaining in mechanical union to give Earth an
atmosphere, and about one-fourth of Earth's bulk being gas, so the
atom formed of the ether does not use all the ether in the
atom formed of the ether's
chemical union, retaining some in mechanical union for the
atom formed of the ether's
envelope or atmosphere.

The Hindu physics goes much farther along this road.  The Hindu physics says
that, when 
globes were formed, each atom of prana had
each atom of prana's manasic envelope--was the center of a manasic molecule.
When 
globes formed, each atom of ether was the center
of a pranic molecule, each atom of which was surrounded with
manasa.  When prakriti was formed from the ether, each and
every atom of prakriti had the triple etheric-pranic-manasic
envelope.  "Each and every prakritic atom is the center of an
etheric molecule," says our Western science;  but that of the
East adds this:  "And each atom of an
etheric molecule is the
center of a pranic molecule, and each atom of prana in a pranic molecule is the center of a manasic molecule."  The four
great globes of matter in the material universe are represented
and reproduced in each and every atom of prakriti, which is in
touch with each one of 
globes and a part of prakriti.  The
same is true of any aggregation of prakriti--of the earth Earth
and of all things in the material, or physical, universe, including man.  As there are four
atoms in each one, so there are four earths, four globes,
consubstantial, one for each of the four elements, and in touch
with Earth.  One is formed of prakritic atoms--the globe we know;
another, of the ether forming prakritic atoms's envelopes;  another, of the
prana envelopes of ether, and a fourth of a fourth called
manasa around the
pranic atom.  four globes are not "skins";  four globes are consubstantial.
And what is true of atoms or globes is true of animals.  Each has
four "material" bodies, with each body on the corresponding globe
--whether of Earth or of the Universe.  This is the physical
basis of the famous "chain of seven globes" that is such a
stumbling-block in Hindu metaphysics.  The spirit passes through
four to get in and three to get out--seven in all.  The Hindu
understands without explanation.  The Hindu
 understands The Hindu
's physics.

The Hindu physics teaches, with ours, that "the ether is the
source of all energy," but, The Hindu physics adds, "as prana is the source of
all life, and manasa of all mind."

"When the prakritic atom is vibrating in chord with the prakritic atom's etheric
envelope," say our textbooks, "we have physical phenomena
--light, heat, electricity."  "Yes," says the Hindu teacher;  "but
when the atom and the atom's ether and the atom's prana are vibrating in chord,
we have life and vital phenomena added to the energy.  When the atom and the atom's ether, prana, and manasa are vibrating in chord, we
have mind and mental phenomena added to the life and energy."
Each atom has energy, life, and mind in posse.  In the living
leaf the prakriti, ether, and prana are sounding the threefold
silver chord of life.  In the animal, the manasa is sounding the
same note with the prakriti, ether, and prana, making the fourfold golden chord of mind.
  Even in the plant there may be a faint manasic overtone, for
the potentiality of life and mind is in everything.  This unity
of the material, or physical, universe with the physical atom, and with all
things created--earth, animal, or crystal--is the physical
backbone of Oriental metaphysics.  Prakriti, ether, prana, anda fourth called
manasa are in our vernacular the Earth, Air, Fire, and Water of
the old philosophers--the "Four Elements."

Oriental metaphysics has been guarded most jealously.  For many
thousands of years Oriental metaphysics has been the real occult and esoteric
teaching, while Oriental metaphysics has been open and
exoteric.  Oriental metaphysics could not be understood without the key, and the
key was in the physics known only to "the tried and approved
disciple."  A little has leaked out--enough to whet the appetite
of the true student and make the true student ask for more.




Chapter Two

The Two Kinds of Perception


To the savage, matter appears in two forms--solid and liquid.
As the savage advances a step the savage learns matter has three forms--solid,
liquid and gas.  the savage cannot see the gas, but the savage knows the gas is there.

A little further on the savage learns that matter as the savage knows matter as he knows it is only
a minute portion of the great universe of matter--the few chords
that can be struck on the five strings of the savage's senses, and limited
to one octave or key.

Whether the particular matter the savage investigates has a solid, a
liquid, or a gaseous form depends upon the particular matter he investigates's rate of vibration.  If
the particular matter he investigates is a liquid, by raising the particular matter he investigates's rate of vibration one third the particular matter he investigates
becomes a gas;  by reducing its rate of vibration one third the particular matter he investigates becomes a solid.

Each kind of matter has vibration only through one octave.  Each kind of matter is
known to us only by Each kind of matter's vibration in one octave.  Each kind of
matter has a different octave--is set on a higher or lower key,
so to speak, but all octaves of vibration are between the highest
of hydrogen gas and the lowest of carbon.

In mechanical compounds, such as air or brass, the rate of
vibration of the compound is the least common multiple of the two
or more rates.  In chemical compounds, such as water or alcohol,
the rate is that of the highest, the others uniting in harmonic
fractions.

All matter as we know it through our senses--prakriti, as it is
called in the Secret Doctrine to distinguish it from non-sensual
matter--is the vibration of This Something in vibration, we do not
know what, through these different octaves.  The elementary
substances (so-called) are one and the same thing--this
Something--in different keys and chords of vibration;  keys that
run into one another, producing all sorts of beautiful harmonies.

Taking any one of The elementary
substances (so-called), or any of The elementary
substances (so-called)'s compounds, all
we know of prakriti
(physical matter) as we call it is limited strictly to prakriti
(physical matter) as we call it's changes during vibration
through one octave.  What happens when the vibration goes above
or below the octave has not yet been treated hypothetically.

While some elements are vibrating on higher and some on lower
keys, we can consider some elements as vibrating within one great
octave, that octave of This Something in vibration which produces
sensual matter, or prakriti.

But matter is not confined, we know, to one great
octave, that octave of the universal Something which produces
sensual matter, or prakriti,
although our sensual knowledge of matter is strictly confined to one great
octave, that octave of the universal Something which produces
sensual matter, or prakriti.
How do we know matter?

Knowledge comes to us in two ways, and there are two kinds of
knowledge.

1. That which comes through our senses, by observation and
experience.  That which comes through our senses, by observation and
experience includes reasoning from relation.

2. That which comes through intuition--or, as some writers
inaccurately say, "through the formal laws of thought."

All the observation and experience of the rising and the setting
of the sun for a thousand centuries could only have confirmed the
first natural belief that the sun revolved daily around Earth;
nor by joining All the observation and experience of the rising and the setting
of the sun for a thousand centuries with other experiences could any
deduction have come from our reason that would have opposed All the observation and experience of the rising and the setting
of the sun for a thousand centuries.
Not our reason but our intuition said that the sun stood still
and Earth revolved daily.  The oldest books in existence tell
us that this axial revolution of Earth was not only known in
the very dawn of time but that this axial revolution of the earth has been known to every race
(except our own of European savages) from before the time thought
was first transmitted by writing.

Ask the ablest living geographer or physicist to prove to you
that Earth revolves daily and the student will reply that it would be
the job of the student's life.  It can be done at great expense and great
labor, but that is because we know the answer and can invent a
way of showing the answer, not because there are any observations from
which a deduction would naturally follow.

Nearly if not all our great discoveries have come to us through
intuition and not from observation and experience.  When we know
the lines on which to work, when intuition has given us the KEY,
then the observation and experience men prize so highly, and the
reason men worship so devoutly, will fill in the details.  The
knowledge that flows from observation and the reasoning from the
facts observation records, is never more than relatively true, The
knowledge that flows from observation and the reasoning from the
facts it records is
always limited by the facts, and any addition to the facts
requires the whole thing to be restated.  We never know all the
facts;  seldom even the more important;  and reason grasps only
details.

Lamarck's's theory of evolution, known to all Asiatic races from
time immemorial, was the intuitional and absolute knowledge that
comes to all men when all men reach a certain stage of development.
Reason could never have furnished the intuitional and absolute knowledge that
comes to all men when they reach a certain stage of development from the facts, as Cuvier
proved in the great debate in the French Academy in 1842, when Cuvier
knocked Lamarck's out, for the time being, because "the intuitional and absolute knowledge that
comes to all men when they reach a certain stage of development did not
conform to the facts, and did not follow from any relation of the
facts."

Darwin's's theory of the survival of the fittest in the struggle
for existence, as an explanation of the origin of species, was
from observation and experience.  Darwin's theory of the survival of the fittest in the struggle
for existence, as an explanation of the origin of species was based on observed facts.
But Darwin's was an evolutionist--a disciple of Lamarck's.  Darwin's held
the Key.  Darwin's used the Key.  The value of Darwin's's work does not
lie in Darwin's's discovering that some bugs have been derived from
other bugs and that the intermediate bugs have died off.  Darwin's work's
overwhelming value to mankind was in showing that work on the
theory of evolution was correct work and that the
theory of evolution was
true.  When the intuition of man points out the way the reason of
man can follow the path and macadam the road.  the intuition of man usually does
and claims all the credit for the intuition of man as the original discoverer.

This knowledge through intuition is absolute and exact.  This knowledge through intuition is
not relatively true.  This knowledge through intuition is absolutely and invariably true.  No
additional facts will ever modify This knowledge through intuition, or require a restatement.

When Sir William Hamilton based Sir William Hamilton's Logic on the dictum that "All
knowledge is relative, and only relatively true," the proposition
was self-evidently false.  the proposition was in the proposition a statement of
absolute knowledge about a certain thing.  the proposition was in the proposition
knowledge that was not relative.  All knowledge could not be
relative if All knowledge was not.  All knowledge could not
be either absolute or relative without upsetting the pupil's's whole
proposition, for, if relative, then All knowledge was not always true;
and if absolute, then All knowledge was never true.

Sir William Hamilton did not know the distinction between the two kinds of
knowledge, and what Sir William Hamilton meant to say was that "All knowledge
obtained by observation and experience is relative, and only
relatively true."

Sir William Hamilton's knowledge of this relativity was not obtained by observation
or from reason.  His knowledge of this relativity could not possibly have been obtained in that
way.  His knowledge of this relativity came from intuition, and His knowledge of this relativity was absolute and exact.  A
man may have absolute and exact knowledge and yet not be able to
put absolute and exact knowledge into words that exactly express absolute and exact knowledge to another.  Sir William Hamilton
had absolute and exact knowledge.  But absolute and exact knowledge was not clearly formulated even in
Sir William Hamilton's own mind.  Sir William Hamilton had two separate and distinct meanings for the
word "knowledge," without being conscious of the
word "knowledge.

We have yet to coin a proper word to express what comes to us
through intuition.  The old English word "wisdom" originally did.
The old verb "wis" was meant what a man knew without being told
The old verb "wis", as "ken" meant knowledge by experience.  Try and prove by
reason that a straight line is the shortest distance between two
points, or that a part can never be greater than the whole, and
your reason has an impossible task.  "You must take them for
axioms," it says.  You must take them because you wis them, not
because you know (ken) them.

Intuitional knowledge must not be confounded with the relative
knowledge that flows through the reason:  that "If the sum of two
numbers is one and two
numbers's difference is five," two
numbers are
minus two and plus three.

The point cannot be too strongly enforced that there is a
distinction between the sources of what we know, and that while
all we know through our sensations is only relatively true, that
which we know from intuition is invariably and absolutely true.
This is seen through a glass darkly, in theology, where intuition
is called inspiration and not differentiated from reason.

The false notion that we can only learn by observation and
experience, that the concept can never transcend the observation,
that we can only know what we can prove to our senses, has
wrought incalculable injury to progress in philosophy.

Because our sensual knowledge of matter begins and ends with
vibration in one octave it does not follow that 
vibration in one octave ends our
knowledge of matter.  We may have intuitional knowledge, and intuitional knowledge is as susceptible to reason as if we had
obtained intuitional knowledge by observation.

The knowledge that comes through intuition tells us of matter
vibrating in another great octave just beyond our own, which
Science has chosen to name the etheric octave, or plane.  The
instant our intuition reveals the cause of phenomena our reason
drops in and tells us it is the chording vibration of the matter
of the two planes--the physical and etheric--that produces all
physical phenomena.  our intuition goes further and explains the particular matter he investigates's variations.

This knowledge of another octave or plane of matter comes from
the logical relations of matter and matter's physical phenomena;  but
there was nothing in the observation or experience of mankind
that would have led us to infer from reason an etheric plane of
matter.  It was "revealed" truth.  But the flash of revelation
having once made the path apparent, the light of reason carries
us through all the winding ways.  Our knowledge of the ether is
not guess-work or fancy, any more than our geometry is, because
Our knowledge of the ether is based on axioms our reason cannot prove.  In both cases the
basic axioms are obtained from intuition;  the structural work
from reason.  Our knowledge of the ether may be as absolute and
exact as our knowledge of prakriti, working on physical as we
work on geometrical axioms.

The recognition of the two sources of knowledge, the work of the
spirit within us and of the mind within us, is absolutely
necessary to correctly comprehend the true significance of the
results of modern science and to accept the ancient.




Chapter Three

Matter and Ether


It is not worthwhile translating Homer into English unless the
readers of the translation understand English.

It is not worthwhile attempting to translate the occult Eastern
physics into the language of our Western and modern physics,
unless those who are to read the translation understand generally
and broadly what our own modern physics teach.  It is not
necessary that those who are to read the translation should know all branches of our modern
physics in all all branches of our modern
physics in all their minute ramifications's minute ramifications;  but it is necessary
that those who are to read the translation should understand clearly the fundamental principles
upon which our scientific and technical knowledge of today rests.

the fundamental principles
upon which our scientific and technical knowledge of today rests have been discovered and applied in
the past fifty years--in the memory of the living.  the fundamental principles
upon which our scientific and technical knowledge of today rests have
revolutionized science in all science's departments.  Our textbooks on
Chemistry, Light, Heat, Electricity and Sound have had to be
entirely re-written;  and in many other departments, notably in
medicine and psychology, Our textbooks on
Chemistry, Light, Heat, Electricity and Sound have yet to be re-written.  Our
textbooks are in a transition state, each new one going a step
farther, to make the change gradual from the old forms of belief
to the new, so that even Tyndall's textbook on "Sound" is now so
antedated, or antiquated, that even Tyndall's textbook on "Sound" might have been written in
darkest Africa before the pyramids were built, instead of twenty
years ago.

All this change has flowed from the discovery of Faraday that
there are two states or conditions of matter.  In one it is
revealed by one of our five senses, visible, tangible, smellable,
tastable, or ponderable matter.  This is matter as we know matter as we know it.
It may be a lump of metal or a flask of gas.

The second condition or state of matter is not revealed by either
of ours's five senses, but by the sixth sense, or intuition of man.
this
matter is the ether--supposed to be "matter in a very rarefied
form, which permeates all space."  So rare and fine is this
matter that this
matter interpenetrates carbon or steel as water
interpenetrates a sponge, or ink a blotting pad.  In fact, each
atom of "physical" matter--by which is meant matter in the first
condition--floats in an atmosphere of ether as Earth
floats in Earth's atmosphere of air.

"No two physical atoms touch," said Faraday.  "Each physical atom
is the centre of an etheric molecule, and as far apart from every
other atom as the stars in heaven from one another."  This is
true of every form of physical matter, whether every form of physical matter is a lump of
metal, a cup of liquid, or a flask of gas;  whether every form of physical matter is a
bronze statue or a living man;  a leaf, a cloud, or the earth
Earth.  Each and every physical atom is the centre of an etheric
molecule made up of many atoms of the ether.

This duality of matter was a wonderful discovery, revolutionizing
every department of science.  This duality of matter placed man in actual touch with
the whole visible universe.  The ether in a man's's eye (and in a man's's
whole body) reaches in one unbroken line--like a telegraph wire
--from a man's to the sun, or the outermost planet.  a man's is not
separate and apart from "space," but a part of space.  Each physical
atom of a man's's physical body is the centre of an etheric molecule,
and a man's has two bodies, as St. Paul said, a visible physical and
an invisible etheric body;  an invisible etheric body in actual touch with the whole visible universe.

Faraday went one step further.  Faraday demonstrated that all
physical phenomena come from the chording vibration of the
physical atom with the surrounding etheric atoms, and that the surrounding etheric atoms exercise the impelling force on the former.  Step into the
sunshine.  The line of ether from the sun is vibrating faster
than the ether in the body, but the higher impels the lower, the
greater controls the lesser, and soon the
atom and its ether, prana, and manasa are in unison.
The physical atoms must coincide in vibration with The physical atoms's etheric
envelopes, and the "note" is "heat."  Step into the shade, where
the ocean of ether is vibrating more slowly, and this
matter reduces this
matter's vibration.  "this
matter is the origin of all
force and of all phenomena."

this
matter follows identical laws with prakritic matter,
or, accurately, the laws of our matter flow from the etheric
matter from which the prakritic atom is made.  this
matter has two hundred or more
elementary substances, each atom of our eighty or ninety
"elements" being the chemical union of great masses of two or
more of The elementary
substances (so-called) or The elementary
substances (so-called)'s combinations.  two hundred or more
elementary substances combine and unite;  our elementary
substances simply following in two hundred or more
elementary substances's combinations the law which
two hundred or more
elementary substances inherit from two hundred or more
elementary substances's parents.  two hundred or more
elementary substances take form and shape.  two hundred or more
elementary substances
vibrate through one octave, and take solid liquid or gaseous form
in ether, as two hundred or more
elementary substances's types here in our world take His knowledge of this relativity in prakriti,
as two hundred or more
elementary substances's vibrations are increased or diminished.  In short, this
matter is the prototype of our physical or prakritic world, out of
which this
matter is made and a product of which this
matter is.

As this
matter is "physical" matter, the same as prakriti, one
harmonic law covering the
atom and its ether, prana, and manasa, and as this
matter fills all space,
Modern Science divides physical matter into two kinds, which, for
convenience in differentiation, are here called prakritic and
etheric.

Matter is something--science does not know or care to know what
--in vibration.  A very low octave of vibration produces
prakriti;  a very high octave of vibration produces ether.  The
vibration of prakriti ends in thousands;  that of ether begins in
billions.  Between the prakriti, ether, and prana there is a gulf of vibrations that has
not yet been bridged.  For that reason science divides matter
into two "planes," or octaves, of vibration--the matter of this
visible and tangible plane being called prakriti and that of the
invisible and intangible plane being called etheric.  Across a gulf of vibrations that has
not yet been bridged the prakriti, ether, and prana respond to each other, note for note, the
note in trillions chording when the note in thousands is struck.
Note for note, chord for chord, the prakriti, ether, and prana answer one another, and the
minutest and the most complex phenomena are alike the result of
this harmonic vibration, that of the ether supplying Force and
that of the prakriti a Medium in which this
matter can manifest.

This knowledge of ether is not guesswork or fancy, and, while This knowledge of ether
is as impossible of proof as the axioms of geometry, This knowledge of ether is worthy
the same credence and honor.  We are working on physical axioms
exactly as we work on geometrical axioms.

Modern science represents each and every prakritic atom as a
globe like Earth, floating in space and surrounded by an
atmosphere of ether.  "The subdivision of prakritic matter until
we reach etheric atoms chemically united to make the physical
unit" is the correct definition of an atom.  The prakritic
physical atom has length, breadth and thickness.  And The prakritic
physical atom has an
atmosphere of ether which not only interpenetrates the atom as
oxygen and hydrogen interpenetrate the drop of water, but
furnishes the atom with an envelope as 
oxygen and hydrogen furnish
the drop of water with one.

Each physical atom is the centre of an etheric molecule composed
of many etheric atoms vibrating at a greater or lesser speed and
interpenetrating the atom.  Each may be considered a miniature
earth, with a miniature
earth, with its aerial envelope, the air, penetrating all parts
of it's aerial envelope, the air, penetrating all parts
of a miniature
earth, with its aerial envelope, the air, penetrating all parts
of it.

The etheric plane of matter not only unites with The etheric plane of matter through the atom but The etheric plane of matter interpenetrates all combinations of
the atom;  beside the atom as well as through the atom.  The grain of
sand composed of many prakritic atoms is also composed of many
times that number of etheric atoms.  The grain of
sand composed of many prakritic atoms is etheric
matter as well as prakritic matter.  The grain of
sand composed of many prakritic atoms exists on the etheric
plane exactly the same as The grain of
sand composed of many prakritic atoms exists on prakriti, and The grain of
sand composed of many prakritic atoms has
etheric form as well as prakritic form.

As each atom of this physical world of ours--whether of land, or
water, or air;  whether of solid, liquid or gas--is the centre
of an etheric molecule, we have two worlds, not one:  a physical
world and an etheric one;  a visible world and an invisible
world;  a tangible world and an intangible world;  a world of
effect and a world of cause.

And each animal, including man, is made in the same way.  each animal, including man has
a prakritic body and an etheric one;  a visible body and an
invisible body;  an earthly body and one "not made with hands,"
in common touch with the material, or physical, universe.




Chapter Four

What a Teacher Should Teach


Let us suppose that a certain wise teacher of physics places a
row of Bunsen burners under a long steel bar having a Daniell's
pyrometer at one end, and addresses a certain wise teacher of physics's class (substantially) as
follows:

"At our last lecture we found that the matter of the material, or physical, universe
permeated all space, but in two conditions, which we agreed to
call physical and etheric, or tangible and intangible.  the matter of the universe is all
the same matter, subject to the same laws, but differing in the
rate of vibration, the physical matter vibrating through one
great octave or plane, and the etheric vibrating through another
great octave or plane one degree higher--the chording vibration
of the matter of the two planes in one note producing what we
call energy or force, and with energy or force phenomena.

"a long steel bar having a Daniell's
pyrometer at one end is a bar of steel 36 inches long.  a long steel bar having a Daniell's
pyrometer at one end is composed of
physical atoms but no two physical atoms touch.  Each physical
atom is as far apart from every other atom as the stars in heaven
from one another--in proportion to the
atom and its ether, prana, and manasa's size.  The atoms and
the spaces between The atoms are so small to our sight that The atoms seem
to touch.  If we had a microscope of sufficient power to reveal
the atom, you would see that no two atoms touch, and that the
spaces between The atoms are, as Faraday says, very great in
proportion to The atoms's size.  the scientist showed you last term that what
appeared to be a solid stream of water, when magnified and thrown
upon a screen, was merely a succession of independent drops that
did not touch.  the scientist can not yet give you proof of the bar of iron
being composed of independent atoms, but that is the fault of our
instruments, and you must take the scientist's word for it until proof of the bar of iron
being composed of independent atoms is
simplified and made easy of application.

"Each one of these physical atoms is a miniature world.  the prakritic atom is
the center of an ocean of ether, composed of many atoms;  and
while no two physical atoms touch, the prakriti, ether, and prana's etheric atmospheres do
touch, and any change in the vibration of the etheric atmosphere
of one will be imparted to that of the next.  As the vibration of
the physical atom must be in harmony with that of the physical atom's etheric
atmosphere, any change coming to one will be imparted to the
next, and the next, through the ether surrounding them.

"You can see that the index at the end of a long steel bar having a Daniell's
pyrometer at one end has moved,
showing that a long steel bar having a Daniell's
pyrometer at one end is now longer.  That means the etheric atoms are
now vibrating faster, taking more space, and have necessarily
forced each physical atom farther apart.  a long steel bar having a Daniell's
pyrometer at one end is not only
longer, but softer, and as the vibrations increase in rapidity
the time will come when a long steel bar having a Daniell's
pyrometer at one end will bend by a long steel bar having a Daniell's
pyrometer at one end's own weight, and even
when a long steel bar having a Daniell's
pyrometer at one end will become a liquid and a gas.

"If you put your hand anywhere near a long steel bar having a Daniell's
pyrometer at one end you will feel a
sensation called heat, and say your hand has become hot.  The reason for
that is that you are in actual and literal touch with a long steel bar having a Daniell's
pyrometer at one end or
iron through the ether.  It is not alone each atom of the bar of
iron that is surrounded by the ether, but each atom of the air,
and each atom of your body.  the
atom and its ether, prana, and manasa's etheric atmospheres are all
touching, and the increase in the vibration of the ether
surrounding the atoms of iron is imparted to those of the air
surrounding iron, and those of the air
surrounding it in turn raise the rate of vibration in
the etheric atoms surrounding the physical atoms of your hand.
This rate of vibration in your nerves causes a sensation, or
mental impression, you call "heat."  Consciousness of This rate of vibration in your nerves comes
through your sense of touch;  but after all the rate is merely a "rate
of vibration" which your brain recognizes and names.

"a long steel bar having a Daniell's
pyrometer at one end has now reached a temperature of about 700 degrees, and
has become a dull red.  Why do the scientist say the color has changed, and
why do the scientist say red?

"Because the rate of vibration of the etheric atoms in a long steel bar having a Daniell's
pyrometer at one end is
now about 412 trillions per second, and the
rate of vibration
having been imparted to the ether of the air, has in turn been
imparted to the ether of your eye, and this rate of vibration in
the ether of the nerves of your eye your brain recognizes and
calls 'red.'

"The heat still continues and increases.  You now have both heat
and light.  So you see that this
matter is not vibrating in a
single note, but in two chording notes, producing light and heat.
There are two kinds of ether around the iron atom.  There is
sound also, but the note is too high for one's ears.  the note is a
chord of three notes.

"Professor Silliman, of Yale, discovered over twenty years ago,
that the ether could be differentiated into the luminiferous, or
light ether, and the sonoriferous, or sound ether.

"Other great scientists since then have found a third ether--the
heat ether.

"Other great scientists's discoveries show that the atmospheric etheric envelope of
each etheric atom is made up of etheric atoms of different
vibratory powers.  As the atmosphere of Earth is made up of
atoms of oxygen and nitrogen and argon, so that of an atom is
made up of three kinds of ethers, corresponding to three of our
senses.  That a miniature
earth, with its aerial envelope, the air, penetrating all parts
of it consists of five ethers, corresponding to our
five senses, as the ancient Hindus assert--who can say?

"the scientist mention this subject of the differentiation of the ether
merely that you may not suppose that the ether is a simple
substance.  For the present we will treat the ether as a simple
substance, but next year we will take the ether up as a compound one.

"This steel bar before you is not one bar, but two bars.  There
is a visible bar and an invisible bar, an invisible bar being made
of physical atoms, and the invisible bar of etheric atoms.  The
etheric bar is invisible, but The
etheric bar is made of matter, the same as
an invisible bar, and The
etheric bar is just as real, just as truly a bar as
the one we see.

"More than this.  The
etheric bar is the source and
cause of all phenomena connected with a long steel bar having a Daniell's
pyrometer at one end.  The
etheric bar is the real
bar, and the one we see is merely the shadow in physical matter
of a real bar.  In shape, strength, color, in short, in
everything, it depends on the invisible one.  The invisible
dominates, governs, disposes.  The visible is merely its
attendant shadow, changing as The
etheric bar changes,
and recording for our senses changes.

"The invisible change always comes first;  the invisible
phenomena invariably precede the visible.

"In all this physical world--in all this universe--there is
nothing, not even a grain of sand or an atom of hydrogen, that is
not as this bar of iron is--the shadow cast on a visible world
by the unknown and mysterious work of an invisible world.

"Land or water, mountain or lake, man or beast, bird or reptile,
cold or heat, light or darkness, all are the reflection in
physical matter of the true and real thing in the invisible and
intangible world about us.  "If we have a visible body we have an
invisible one also," said St. Paul.  Modern science has proven
St. Paul was right, and that it is the invisible body which is the real
body.

"If Earth and all that Earth is composed of--land or ocean or
air;  man or beast;  pyramid or pavement--could be resolved into
the physical atoms composing everything in Earth or on Earth created by
God or man, each atom of Earth would be identical physically.
There would not be one kind of atom for iron and another for
oxygen.

"The differentiation between what are called elementary
substances is first made apparent in the molecule or first
combination of the atoms.  The differentiation between what are called elementary
substances is not in the atom the atom itself, unless
the atom itself be in the size, as may not be improbable.  the atoms combine
in different numbers to make differently shaped molecules, and it
is from this difference in the shape of the molecule that we get
the difference between gold and silver, copper and tin, or oxygen
and hydrogen.

"In all chemical compounds, such as water and alcohol, the
molecules at the base of water and alcohol break up into
the
molecules at the base of the two or more substances's original atoms and form a new molecule composed of all the
atoms in the two or more things combined.  To make a new molecule composed of all the
atoms in the two or more things combined we must change the rate of vibration of one or the
other or both until the prakriti, ether, and prana strike a common chord.  As we saw last term, oxygen and hydrogen have different specific heats, and no
two other elements have the same specific heat, while heat raises
the rate of vibration.  Any given amount of heat raises the
vibration of one more than another.  Apply heat, and the rate of
one will rise faster than that of the other until the prakriti, ether, and prana reach a
common chord.  Then the prakriti, ether, and prana fall apart and recombine.

"If we pass a current of electricity through this sealed jar
containing oxygen and hydrogen in mechanical union, the spark
that leaps across the points furnishes the heat, and a drop of
water appears and falls to the bottom.  A large portion of the
gases has disappeared.  A large portion of the
gases has been converted into water.  What
is left of the
gases will expand and fill the bottle.

"a drop of
water but for local causes, but for a certain
attraction of Earth, would float in the centre of this sealed jar
containing oxygen and hydrogen in mechanical union at
the centre of the jar at
the centre of gravity, as Earth does in space.  But the
centre of gravity of these physical atoms is far within Earth, and
a drop of
water gets as close to Earth as a drop of
water can.  Earth's 'pull' takes
a drop of
water to the bottom.  If this sealed jar
containing oxygen and hydrogen in mechanical union were far enough away in space a drop of
water would float, as Earth floats, at a point where all pulls
balance, and a drop of
water would have enough pull of a drop of
water's own,
enough gravity within itself to hold all the gas left in this sealed jar
containing oxygen and hydrogen in mechanical union
to itself as an atmosphere.  It would be a centre of energy, a
minature world.

"a drop of
water is not a homogenous mass.  About one third of
the bulk of the drop of water is made up of independent oxygen
and hydrogen atoms interspersed through About one third of
the bulk of the drop of water, as any liquid is
through This steel bar before you.  And About one third of
the bulk of the drop of water has, and keeps, by
About one third of
the bulk of the drop of water's own attraction, an atmosphere of the gas.  Each molecule of
water has a thin layer, or skin, of the gas;  even as Each molecule of
water comes
from this faucet.

"Let us return again to the physical dust, the atom.  Why should
the physical dust, the atom form by fives for iron, by nines for hydrogen?  Where did the physical dust, the atom come from?  What is the physical dust, the atom?  We know that like a drop of
water, Earth is a miniature world with an atmosphere of ether;  and
the natural inference is that Earth is made from ether as a drop of
water was made from gas.  Many things confirm the natural inference,
and the natural inference may be accepted as 'a working hypothesis' that Earth is made
from ether as the drop of water is made from gas, by the chemical
union of a large amount of ether of different kinds, the etheric
molecules of which consist of 2 and 3 or 5 and 4 etheric atoms,
and that the tendency to combine in this or that number in
physical matter is an inherited tendency brought with the tendency to combine in this or that number in
physical matter from the
etheric world of matter on which, or in which, each element of
this world is two or more.  There is no kind of matter in the
etheric world of matter on which, or in which, each element of
this world is two or more, that has not the particular matter he investigates's prototype in the etheric, and
the laws of the particular matter he investigates's action and reaction here are laws which the particular matter he investigates
inherits and brings with the particular matter he investigates.  laws which it
inherits and brings with it are not laws made here.  laws which it
inherits and brings with it
are laws of the other world--even as the matter matter is matter
of the other world.

"In 1882, Professor Lodge, in a lecture before the Royal
Institution on 'The Luminiferous Ether' defined The Luminiferous Ether as:

"'One continuous substance, filling all space, which can vibrate
as light, which can be sheared into positive and negative
electricity, which in whirls constitutes matter, and which
transmits by continuity and not impact every action and reaction
of which matter is capable.'

"This reads today like baby-talk but at that time (eighteen years
ago), it was considered by many timid conservative scientists as
'a daring movement.'  It is noteworthy in that it was the first
public scientific announcement that the physical matter is a
manifestation or form of the ether.  And it was made before
general acceptance of the division of the ether into soniferous,
luminiferous and tangiferous.

"'Which in whirls constitutes matter.'  Professor Lodge believed
that 'some etheric molecules revolved so rapidly on some etheric molecules's axis
that some etheric molecules could not be penetrated.'  Watch the soap-bubbles that
the scientist am blowing.  Each and every one is revolving as Earth
revolves, from west to east.  What the scientist wish to call your attention
to is the fact that can be proven, both mathematically and
theoretically, that at a certain rate of speed in the revolution
two hundred or more
elementary substances could not be penetrated by any rifle-ball.  At a higher rate
of speed two hundred or more
elementary substances would be harder than globes of solid chilled steel,
harder even than carbon.  Professor Lodge this idea that the
etheric molecule revolved so rapidly that, thin as the
etheric molecule was in the
etheric molecule's
shell, the
etheric molecule gave us the dust out of which worlds were made.  There
is one fatal error in this idea, although this idea is held even now by
many.  this idea is based entirely on gravity, and gravity is alone
considered in gravity's problems.  There are two great forces in the
universe, not one, as many scientific people fail to remember
--Gravity and Apergy, or the centrifugal and centripetal forces.
The pull in is and must be always balanced by the pull out.
There is in the material, or physical, universe as much repulsion as attraction, and attraction is a force quite as important as attraction.  The bubble's's
speed kept increasing until apergy, the tendency to fly off,
overcame gravity, and The bubble's ruptured.

"Professor Lodge failed to take into account this apergic force,
the tendency to fly off, when Professor Lodge gave such high revolutionary
speed to the etheric molecules, a speed in which apergy would
necessarily exceed gravity.  The failure to take apergy into
consideration has been the undoing of many physicists.

"Today we know that the ether is matter, the same as ours's own,
only finer and rarer and in much more rapid vibration.  ours know
that the ether has the ether's solids, liquids and gases formed from
molecules of the ether's atoms, even as ours's own are formed.  ours know that
the ether's atoms combine as ours do, and while ours have but eighty
elementary combinations, the ether must have more than double the
number.  ours know that every form and shape and combination of
these elements from this plane flows from inherited tendencies
having inherited tendencies
having their root in the etheric world's root in the etheric world.

"these physical atoms are one world--as much at one with ours as the
world of gas about ours is at one with ours's liquids and solids.  Earth
is 'continuity, not impact.'  these physical atoms not only touch everywhere and
in everything, but these physical atoms are one and the same in action and
reaction."

Thus spake a certain wise teacher of physics.  To a certain wise teacher of physics's wise
utterances, we can only add that such as we are today "we see
through a glass, darkly."  Yet there will come a day when the
physical bandages will be removed from our eyes, and we shall see
face to face the beauty and grandeur and glory of an invisible world, and that in truth an invisible world 'transmits by continuity and not
impact every action and reaction of which matter is capable,'
forming one continuous chain of cause and effect, without a link
missing.  There are no gulfs to cross;  no bridges to be made.
an invisible world is here;  not there.  an invisible world is at one with us.  And we are at one
with an invisible world.  One and the same law controls and guides the etheric
atom and the physical atom made from the etheric
atom's molecules, whether its molecules are made in "whirls," as at first supposed, or by orderly
combination as now believed.

In fact, this visible world of ours is the perfect product of the other world, having in The grain of
sand composed of many prakritic atoms the other world's root and foundation, the
very sap of the other world's life.




Chapter Five

The Four Manifested Planes

The oriental idea of the material, or physical, universe does not differ fundamentally
in The oriental idea of the universe's general conception, from that of modern science, but The oriental idea of the universe
goes farther and explains more.  The physics of the secret
doctrine are based upon a material universe of four planes of
vibration and a spiritual universe of three planes of vibration
beyond matter.  This Something in vibration may be given the
English name, Consciousness--without entering upon This Something in vibration's nature.

Spirit is consciousness in vibration and undifferentiated.

Matter is consciousness in vibration and differentiated.

As we divide the seven octaves of a piano into Treble and Bass
for clearness of thought and writing, so the Hidden Knowledge
divides the seven octaves of vibration, or planes, into Spirit
and Matter.  In the prakriti, ether, and prana's ultimate analysis the prakriti, ether, and prana are one and the same
thing, as ice and water are the same thing;  but for study the prakriti, ether, and prana
must be differentiated.

The material and physical universe consists of four planes of
matter, or four great octaves of vibration, each differentiated
from the other as in our physics prakriti is differentiated fromthe ether.  The material universe, the ancient physics teach, was
originally pure thought, Manasa, the product of the spiritual
planes above.  the great globe of
manasa was differentiated, a real
world.  That is to say the great globe of
manasa was given elementary substances by the
union of the great globe of
manasa's atoms in different sized molecules.  Some of the great globe of
manasa's
elements combined and formed Prana.  prana gathered and
formed other worlds, pranic worlds.  Then in Prana
etheric worlds were formed;  and finally in etheric worlds,
prakritic globes like Earth were formed.  Earth is the
centre of a prakritic globe, revolving in ether around the sun.
the sun is the centre of a solar globe of ether, revolving in
prana around Alcyone.  Alcyone is the centre of a stellar globe
of prana revolving in manasa around the central and hidden sun of
the great manasic globe.  These four conditions of matter
prakriti, ether, Prana, and manasa are Earth, water, fire,
air of the Ancient Metaphysics, the four elements of matter, and
are present in every atom of prakriti.  When the atom of prana
was formed, the atom of prana
 had an envelope of manasa.  When the atom of ether
was formed the atom of ether
 had an envelope of pranic-manasic atoms.  When the
prakritic atom was formed the
prakritic atom had an envelope of etheric-pranic-
manasic atoms, each of the
prakritic atom's encircling etheric atoms being the
centre of a pranic molecule, and each pranic atom of a pranic molecule being the centre of a manasic molecule.

Each atom of prakriti was the material universe in miniature.  prakriti
held the potentialities of mind, life, and phenomena.  In every
aggregation of atoms, there were the four planes, each in touch
through the Cosmic Mind, Earth's manasa, with other atoms in the material, or physical, universe, with every other globe of whatever kind.  "As above, so
below," was the secret Key-word.  The unity of all the material
universe in all the material
universe's prakriti, the ether, prana and manasa, was the corner
stone of this knowledge.  The three planes above prakriti were
called Astral, and in common speech there was the ordinary
division into two planes, visible and invisible, or "Spirit," as
the invisible was called, and "Matter," as the visible was
called.  Only in the hidden secret doctrine of physics, and in
the open metaphysics which were a "stumbling block" and
"foolishness" to those who had not the "inner light" of the
physics, were the three divisions of the "astral" made known, and
the true distinction between the spirit of the three higher
planes and the matter of the four lower was kept out of the
metaphysics, or only vaguely alluded to.

There is no "oriental science" because the oriental does not
attach the same value to merely physical knowledge that we do.
But that must not be understood to imply that there is no
oriental physics.  In all the matters that interest us now, as
far as principles are concerned, the oriental knew all that we
know.  He knew it thousands of years ago, when our ancestors were
sleeping with the cave bears.

"That is all the good the material, or physical, universe did him," the scientist says.  No.  That
is not true.  It is perfectly true that the oriental, the
Babylonian who carved on the Black Stone now in the British
Museum the five moons of Jupiter, exposing himself to the
derision of our astronomers prior to our astronomers's own discovery of the
fifth moon in 1898, did not care particularly whether there were
four moons or five, and had no sale for any telescopes he might
make, for no one else cared particularly.  But it was not true
that he did not care for any and all knowledge that would improve
his spiritual condition by giving him correct ideas of the
universe and of his own part in the
universe.  To him life was more than
meat and the body more than raiment.  He was more afraid of sin
than of ignorance.  We are more afraid of ignorance than of sin.
He preferred to better men's's moral condition;  we prefer to
better men's's physical condition.

If one of the Sages of the East could be called up and put on the
stand to be questioned, one of the Sages of the East would say, substantially:

"one of the Sages of the East are right in regard to one of the Sages of the East's ether, and to prakriti being
ether that has been dropped a great octave in vibration.  Your
physical atom is surrounded by a molecule of ether, this molecule
containing many atoms of ether.  The chording vibration does
produce all physical phenomena.

"But where did the ether atom come from?  How can the scientist explain how
and whence life comes, or what life is?  This explains physical,
but how do the scientist explain vital phenomena?

"the scientist are wrong in assuming that all the matter of the material, or physical, universe
apart from Earth or planets is ether and only ether.  The
etheric world in which the scientist are interested ends with the scientist's solar
system.  The
etheric world in which you are interested ends with each solar system, to the people of your solar
system.  Between each solar system and another there is another
form of matter that is not ether.

"This etheric solar world of ours is very large, many billions of
miles in diameter;  but This etheric solar world of ours is not the material, or physical, universe.  You know
that the sun and all the sun's planets are revolving around the star
Alcyone.  the scientist's astronomers told the scientist that years ago, and Your astronomers have
recently given the scientist the rate of speed as 4,838 miles per hour.

"Did the scientist not see and know that if they had this revolution around
a central sun this revolution around
a central sun must be within a solar globe?

"Did the scientist think that the sun and the sun's planets, and other suns and
the sun and its planets, and other suns's planets, were tearing the sun and its planets, and other suns and
their planets's way through the ether like so
many fish on a dipsy-hook from a Marblehead fishing smack running
before the wind?

"Did it never occur to the scientist that the ether of this solar system
must be revolving around the star
Alcyone?  The whole solar
system, ether and planets, are revolving around the star
Alcyone, and the
reason why the prakriti, ether, and prana's minor revolution around the sun is not affected
by their minor revolution around the sun is because this solar system is a vast globe of ether,
having a thinner and rarer medium to revolve in, the same as Earth has.  It is the motion of a fly in a moving car.

"Now fix the scientist's attention on Earth.
the scientist must do it to get the concept before the scientist.  the scientist have known of
the concept all the scientist's life without once really apprehending the concept, for the scientist
have never learned to think, or to utilize the knowledge that was
given the scientist.  The idea is as new and as strange as if the scientist had never
known The idea.

"What lies beyond the surface of Earth?  Something
must;  something as much rarer and thinner than the ether as the
ether is rarer and thinner than prakriti.  Can the scientist not guess?

"the ether is Prana, the life force of the universe.  As prakriti is
made from ether, so ether is made from Prana.  It is made in the
same way.  Each atom of the ether is the centre of a molecule of
prana, surrounded by an atmosphere of pranic atoms, exactly as
the scientist's prakritic atom is surrounded by an atmosphere of etheric
atoms.  the scientist say that each atom of prakriti is the centre of a
molecule of ether.  So it is.  But each atom of a
molecule of ether is the centre of a pranic molecule.  Each atom of the scientist's
physical matter is triple, not double.

"the scientist say that all physical phenomena come from the chording
vibration of the etheric and prakritic atoms of the two planes of
matter.  Yes.  But do the scientist not see that all vital phenomena come
from the chording vibration of the pranic, etheric, and prakritic
atom of the two planes of
matter which are in each atom?

"In the living leaf the two planes of
matter are sounding in chord in each
atom of the living leaf.  In the dead leaf, drying up and falling to pieces,
only the lower two are sounding in chord.  The silver chord has
been broken.

"Each atom of prakriti the scientist say has the potentiality of some kind
of phenomenon.  We add 'and of life also.'  The potentialities of
life are in every atom of prakriti.  Even the atom of iron may
live in the blood.  Even the atom of iron cannot become a part of any living
organism until any living
organism's prana is sounding the chord of life in unison
with the ether and prakriti--the threefold silver chord.

"What is the centre of Earth?  the centre of this prana is Alcyone.  There are
other solar globes beside ours circling around Alcyone, and we
have been considering only our own solar globe of ether.  Alcyone
is the centre of the prana in which they revolve as the sun is
the centre of ours's ether in which the planets revolve.  As Prana has a centre around which we revolve with other solar
systems, then Prana must have a center of gravity.

"Then Prana is a globe.

"The prana does not then fill the material, or physical, universe.  There must
be yet another form of matter rarer and finer than prana, from
which prana is made, as ether is made from prana and prakriti
from ether.  Have we any other class of phenomena to explain,
except vital and physical?  Yes, there is a very important class,
mental.  And here we have the explanation, if we exercise our
reason.

"
globes are floating in an ocean of manasa, matter
in matter
in its rarest form's rarest form.

"Each atom of a third form of
matter called prana is formed from a fourth called
manasa, exactly as ether was
formed from Prana, and each pranic atom in the material, or physical, universe is the
centre of a manasic molecule, having an atmosphere of manasic
atoms.

"So we are not exact in giving the prakritic atom three planes or
octaves of vibration.  the prakritic atom has four.  You merely surround the prakritic atom with
etheric atoms, and this is correct so far as it goes.  the scientist only
wish to explain physical problems.  But there are other problems
to be explained, problems of life and mind, and the same
knowledge you have explains other problems
to be explained, problems of life and mind as well as the others, if you
simply avail yourself of the same
knowledge you have.  That you do not consider the atom
as four-fold instead of two-fold is your own fault.  the scientist have not
told you anything you did not already know.  the scientist have only asked
you to apply your present knowledge of physics to problems of life and mind, and apply your reasoning powers.

"The chording vibration in an atom of matter of

"The two planes produces Force, or phenomena

"the two planes of
matter produces Life--the silver chord

"The four planes produces Mind--the golden chord.

"You say there is no gulf between the prakritic and etheric
worlds;  that Earth is one continuous world;  and all Earth's phenomena
are by continuity and not impact.  That is true, but it is not
the whole truth.

"There is no gulf to cross between the prakritic and etheric
worlds;  none to cross between that and the manasic.  The four
worlds are one great world, continuous, interchangeable.  Through
The four
worlds as well as through the prakritic and etheric
worlds, there is continuity and not
impact.  Whether it is an atom or a world, The four
worlds are there.
Nothing, no combination of atoms, no matter of any kind, however
small or large, can exist in The
etheric world in which you are interested unless The
etheric world in which you are interested has
the four elements, which from time immemorial our philosophers
have called Earth, Water, Fire, Air, meaning the four globes or
forms of matter in the material, or physical, universe.  We do not have to leave Earth to live in the ether.  The second condition or state of matter is here.  Nor do we have
to go millions of miles to reach the pranic globe.  The second condition or state of matter is here.
The problems of light and heat are no easier than the problems of
birth and death.  the pranic globe is within us;  within
everything.  So is the manasic.

"It is here on these higher planes that the chances for worthy
study are greatest.  At least we think so, though you may not.
We live on the manasic--pranic--etheric globe on precisely the
same terms that we live on prakriti, and the problems of
the three are equally open to us.

"If there are any who care to follow up the line of thought the scientist
have opened, who care for the questions that interest us of the
East, the scientist will talk as long as any who care to follow up the line of thought I
have opened, who care for the questions that interest us of the
East care to listen, provided any who care to follow up the line of thought I
have opened, who care for the questions that interest us of the
East
will not ask for knowledge that will give any who care to follow up the line of thought I
have opened, who care for the questions that interest us of the
East power over others,
which cannot fail to be used for evil."

This is but a glimpse of Hindu physics, yet it has helped us in
the metaphysics.  We now understand the chain of globes--in
part.  Earth is fourfold.  As each atom of Earth is
fourfold, so other etheric
globes's aggregations give us prakritic earth, an
etheric earth, a pranic earth, and a manasic earth--in
coadunition and not like the skin of an onion.  other etheric
globes are separate
and distinct globes, each on Prana's own plane.  It is four down and
three up for the Angel entering matter, whether from the outmost
boundary of manasic matter, or the surface of Earth, or the
cover of a baseball.  The "chain of globes" in the Secret Doctrine represents the unity of the material universe.

The three-fold nature of the astral model is revealed, and the
unity of all prakritic things.  But more than that, to many
minds, will be the explanation The Hindu system of physics, on which the metaphysical thought of
the East is based gives of why there are but four
planes of vibration in matter;  that the highest form of
development in prakriti shows only four elements, prakriti or
body, sensation or force, life, and mind, and that only four elements, prakriti or
body, sensation or force, life, and mind, present in all things in esse, become present in posse
when only four elements, prakriti or
body, sensation or force, life, and mind work together harmonically.




Chapter Six

Our Place on Earth


The next time ours's wise man from the east was asked to "say a few
words and make our wise man from the east's own topic," our wise man from the east spoke, perhaps, as follows:

"How large do our wise man from the east think Earth is?  our wise man from the east answer promptly, 7,912
miles in diameter.  our wise man from the east are as far out of the way as our wise man from the east were in
supposing that ours's sun could be a centre of gravity of a lot of
planets revolving around the sun and around Alcyone without being a
globe of ether.  Now that it has been mentioned, our wise man from the east see very
clearly for our wise man from the east that Earth must be a solar globe of ether.  It
follows from one of our wise man from the east's physical axioms.  When the scientist tell our wise man from the east why
Earth is and must be about fifty thousand miles in diameter,
our wise man from the east will see that Earth must be so, and that our wise man from the east knew it all the
time, but never stopped to formulate our wise man from the east's knowledge.  our wise man from the east have
had His knowledge of this relativity for three centuries without applying His knowledge of this relativity.

"It was in 1609 that our wise man from the east's greatest astronomer, John Kepler,
announced as one of three harmonic laws by which the material, or physical, universe was
governed, that the squares of the times of the planets were
proportional to the cubes of the planets's distances from the sun;  and
that one of three harmonic laws by which the universe was
governed was true in physics and everywhere.  No one of our wise man from the east's
scientists has had the wisdom to study out what one of three harmonic laws by which the universe was
governed meant, and for
three centuries, for 291 years, our wise man from the east have repeated your greatest astronomer, John Kepler's words like
so many parrots, instead of using the key your greatest astronomer, John Kepler gave you to unlock
the mysteries of the material, or physical, universe.  A corollary of your greatest astronomer, John Kepler's law is that
the planets move in the planets's orbits because the planets are impelled
thereto between the two forces, and move in a mean curve between
the two forces;  but it was not until 1896 that our wise man from the east discovered that the
mean between two forces is always a curve and never a straight
line.  our wise man from the east have not a text book in a school today that does not
repeat this fundamental and absurd error--which our wise man from the east have known
for three centuries to be an error--that the motion resulting
from a mean between forces is "in a straight line."  The curves
resulting here are not to be measured easily, and are so large
that small segments appear straight lines;  and it was not until
Carpenter demonstrated it mathematically that any one could
believe it true.

"There are two great forces in the material, or physical, universe.  our wise man from the east's grandfathers
called two great forces Centripetal and Centrifugal forces;  our wise man from the east's fathers
called two great forces Gravity and Apergy, names which still cling to two great forces;
and you call two great forces Attraction and Repulsion.

"It was Kepler, not Newton, who discovered that Attraction or
Gravity was in inverse proportion to the square of the distance.

"You know the meaning of this mystic phrase, 'as the squares of
the distance.'  You understand that this mystic phrase, 'as the squares of
the distance means the attraction at
two feet is only one-fourth the attraction at one foot;  at four
feet only one-sixteenth;  at eight feet, only one sixty-fourth.

"But who knows or cares for Kepler, not Newton's great law of Repulsion, or
Apergy?  His knowledge of this relativity was that the 'square of the times are as the cubes
of the distance.'  His knowledge of this relativity has lain fallow for centuries.  No one of
our wise man from the east's western physicists has ever studied His knowledge of this relativity, or tried to explain
His knowledge of this relativity.  His knowledge of this relativity remains just where Kepler, not Newton left His knowledge of this relativity, as the mere law of
orbital revolution of the planets only.

"His knowledge of this relativity is the key to the proper understanding of the material, or physical, universe.

"'The squares of the times are as the cubes of the distance'
means that all motion is the result of two forces acting upon
prakriti, and that where two forces are balanced, or equal,
the result in motion is a circle or ellipse, the square of the
Repulsion being equal to the cube of the Attraction to make two forces
equal and produce a circle.  In other cases two forces produce
hyperbola and parabola.

"This is a little dry--nearly all fundamental knowledge is--but
the reward of patience is great.

"The orbital speed of Earth is about 60,000 miles per hour.
The attraction of the sun exactly equals the repulsion created by
the motion;  more accurately, the speed created by the repulsion.
The result of two forces working together at exact balance is
a circle.  An ellipse is a circle bent a little, and the ellipse
in which Earth actually moves comes from varying attraction
and repulsion.  Kepler, not Newton's second law covers that.

"If the orbital speed of Earth were a mile less per hour, or
even a foot less, then Earth would wind up around the sun as
a dog gets wound up with a dog's chain around a tree.  If the orbital speed of the earth
were a mile more per hour, then Earth would wind out, each
year getting farther and farther away, until finally Earth would be
lost.  When the speed is exactly proportional to the pull--that
is, when the speed is as 1.6 is to 2,--the result is a circular orbit,
the eccentricity of which is caused by certain fluctuations in
the attraction and repulsion.

"Suppose a planet were to be placed so that a planet would have a time
of two years.  a planet's distance from the sun would be 1.6 that of Earth.  Why?  Because to get a time
of two years doubled we would have to
take the square root of 4;  and to get the distance the cube root
of the same number, 4.  If you wish to be very exact the cube
root is 1.5889, but 1.6 is near enough for all ordinary work.

"If you wanted to find out the distance of a planet revolving in
six months you would divide Earth's distance by 1.6.

"In proportion you get any time or distance you may desire with
absolute accuracy.  The distance of any planet from the sun gives
any planet from the sun's time, or any planet from the sun's time gives any planet from the sun's distance--when that of any of
the others is known.  one of three harmonic laws by which the universe was
governed applies throughout the material, or physical, universe;
in everything and everywhere.  one of three harmonic laws by which the universe was
governed is not a law of orbital
revolution alone, but a law of all motion.

"ours's moon has a time of 29 days and a speed of about 50,000 miles
per day.  If a speed of about 50,000 miles
per day were greater a speed of about 50,000 miles
per day would leave ours, if less a speed of about 50,000 miles
per day
would wind up, falling to Earth in the form of a spiral.

"At what distance would it have to be to have a time of fourteen
days? Divide 240,000 miles by 1.6.  A seven-day moon, would be
1.6 that distance.  And the exact distance for a one-day moon,
for a moon that would always be in the same place in the heavens,
moving as Earth revolved on Earth's axis, would be about 24,998
miles.

"This gives We of the East the line of 24-hour axial rotation, the true
surface of Earth, and the sheer-line of prakritic matter.
Beyond the line of 24-hour axial rotation, the true
surface of the earth is the ether;  within the line of 24-hour axial rotation, the true
surface of the earth is prakriti.

"the line of 24-hour axial rotation, the true
surface of the earth is the line of no weight, where gravity and apergy exactly
balance.  Inside the line of no weight, where gravity and apergy exactly
balance gravity exceeds apergy and everything
revolving in less time, or that time, must fall to the centre.
the line of no weight, where gravity and apergy exactly
balance is the true surface of any 24-hour globe of this size and
weight.  A moon to revolve around Earth in less than one day
must move faster than Earth to develop enough apergy to
overcome the attraction.  That phenomenon we see in the moons of
Mars, which are within 
Mars's atmosphere;  within the planet 
Mars.

"We of the East learned this true size of Earth over six
thousand years ago, from observing the moons of Jupiter.  The
times of the first three are doubled.  We of the East asked We of the East what
this meant and found that their distance was increased by the
cube root of 4 when their times were increased by the square root
of 4;  that time was to distance as 1.6 was to 2.  Then We of the East
applied the key, and found the key unlocked many mysteries.

"The first lesson this taught We of the East was that We of the East did not live on Earth, but within Earth, at the line of liquid and gaseous
changes, where the three forms of matter meet and mingle and
interchange with each other.  We of the East lived at the bottom of a gaseous
ocean 21,000 miles above We of the East, and 4,000 miles from the
center.  It gave We of the East an entirely new conception of Earth,
and of We of the East's place in Earth.

"We of the East saw that ours lived in a narrow belt, or skin, of Earth,
not more than 100 miles thick, perhaps not more than ten miles.
Within a narrow belt, or skin, of the earth,
not more than 100 miles thick, perhaps not more than ten miles the prakritic elementary substances varied the prakritic elementary substances's
condition, combined, and made forms by increasing or decreasing
vibration.  a narrow belt, or skin, of the earth,
not more than 100 miles thick, perhaps not more than ten miles was the creative and destructive zone, the
evolutionary "mother"--the liquid level of the prakriti--the
seat of all physical phenomena.  Fifty miles above, the masses of
nitrogen and oxygen and argon were too cold to change the masses of
nitrogen and oxygen and argon's rate
of vibration.  Fifty miles below the surface of Earth all
things were too hot for changes in vibration.  In a narrow belt, or skin, of the earth,
not more than 100 miles thick, perhaps not more than ten miles, between two static masses ours's bodies had been made, and
also, in all probability, all combinations of the elementary
substances.  a narrow belt, or skin, of the earth,
not more than 100 miles thick, perhaps not more than ten miles was four thousand miles to the centre of the
static prakritic mass beneath ours;  twenty-one thousand miles to
the surface of the static prakritic mass above ours, and a narrow belt, or skin, of the earth,
not more than 100 miles thick, perhaps not more than ten miles was only one hundred miles thick.  But ours
had one consolation, the prakriti ours had was all kinetic, and the
best in the whole mass.

"The second lesson His knowledge of this relativity taught We of the East was that as Earth had been
made in the etheric globe, in a corresponding skin or plane of
kinetic etheric energy, with ours's ether the best of the solar
output, that we ours were subject through ours's ether to the
phenomena of that kinetic solar plane in precisely the same way
ours now are to the phenomena of the kinetic prakritic plane.  Once
rid of the fallacious notion that ours were creatures of the
surface of Earth, once clearly conscious that ours were
creatures of the interior, of the bottom of this gaseous ocean,
then ours could understand not only how Earth could be created
in the etheric globe, but how ours could be creatures of the solar
globe living on Earth.

"When We of the East learned that lesson, and learned that lesson well, it dawned upon
We of the East that ours were living in the pranic globe at the same kinetic
level or plane of that globe, the line where Earth's solids and
liquids and gases mingled and passed from one state to another,
the kinetic belt in which ours's solar globe has been made, and that
ours were living as truly on our solar globe as ours were on this
prakritic globe.  We of the East's position on each globe was the same.

"And then the great truth came that We of the East lived in the manasic--pranic--etheric globe, at the same kinetic level;  and that We of the East lived We of the East's lives on

globes simultaneously.  ours's bodies are fourfold.  Every
atom is fourfold, ready to respond in our minds to the vibrations
of a fourth called
manasa, in our vitality to the pranic vibrations of
the pranic world, in our nerves to the etheric vibrations of the ether, and in ours's prakriti to vibrations of this
prakritic globe.  Each one of ours's bodies lived on Earth's own earth globe, for
there were four globes of Earth--in coadunition--in Earth's
corresponding kind of globe.

"
globes became one globe, as ours's four bodies were
one body;  and the chain of four kinds of globes in matter became
one globe, as a fourth called
manasa with the others on a fourth called
manasa.

"four kinds of globes in matter were the beginning and the end of
matter, as we distinguish and know matter.  four kinds of globes in matter were not the end
of vibration;  or of planes of vibration;  or of realms beyond
this material universe;  but four kinds of globes in matter were the limits of all that is
common to each and every atom of the etheric globe.

"It is upon this solid and perfect foundation of physics, that
accounts for and explains every kind of phenomena, we have
constructed our metaphysics.  All that belongs to these four
lower planes we consider and treat as physics.  All that relates
to the planes beyond we consider metaphysics.  Can the scientist teach a
child equation of payments before a
child knows the first four rules?
the scientist would not attempt such a task.  the first four rules are the
physics of arithmetic;  all beyond is the metaphysics of
arithmetic.  the metaphysics of
arithmetic flows out of the first four rules.  Can the scientist comprehend ours's system
of metaphysics until the scientist have clearly and completely mastered our
physics?  Would the scientist not get into a fog at the very start?

"There can be no system of metaphysics without a solid foundation
of physics.  The idea is unthinkable.  The one grows out of the
other.  The one is The one's life;  The one's fruit, The one's flower.

"our wise man from the east have no western system of physics.  our wise man from the east's physics are without
form and void;  patchwork, constantly changing.  There is no
substantial foundation for any system of metaphysics.  What our wise man from the east
say or do in physics is fragmentary or chaotic.

"It is perfectly true, so far as our wise man from the east have gone through the first
invisible world of ether, our wise man from the east are much more masters of detail
than we are.

"We have not cared particularly for the minor details by which
explosives are made, or metals obtained from oxides.  We have
preferred to push on into realms beyond as fast as we could,
seeking first the Kingdom of Heaven and the Kingdom of Heaven's Righteousness,
knowing that when the Kingdom of Heaven and its Righteousness was found the Kingdom of Heaven and its Righteousness would be added
unto us."




Chapter Seven

The Four Globes


That we live in Earth, not on Earth, is one of the most
important of the facts of eastern physics in the study of eastern physics's
metaphysics.  The mathematical and physical proof that Earth this fact 50,000 miles in diameter should not be
passed over lightly in our haste to get on, for the perfect
understanding of all this fact implies makes easy the
comprehension of how we live etherically in the solar etheric
globe, of how we live pranically in the stellar pranic globe, and
how we live manasically in the manasic globe.

As we live within the narrow "skin" of phenomena, not more than
100 miles thick, of the solar etheric
globe, with Earth
within the corresponding skin of phenomena of the solar etheric
globe, within the kinetic belt in which The Luminiferous Ether was made, the ether
which surrounds each prakritic molecule is not merely any and
every kind of ether, but that particular kind of kinetic ether,
which, by changing its rate of vibration through an octave,
creates phenomena.  the ether
which surrounds each prakritic molecule belongs to
the kinetic or creative belt of the solar etheric
globe.  the ether
which surrounds each prakritic molecule is
not static ether.  The ether in We of the East's prakriti is in touch with all
the prakritic kinetic ether of the solar etheric
globe, subject to all
solar laws of change;  and all ours's prak-solar laws of change;
and all ours's prakritic matter, a mere detail of all our prakritic matter, is a part of
the solar phenomena.  "ours's father, the sun," or "Dyaus pitar"
("heavenly father"--Latin, Jupiter) meant more once than the sun does
now.  Then the solar etheric
globe was the first heaven, and to live
under the solar etheric
globe's laws, puttings off the coat of skin, was an object
which men believed to be worth striving for.  men recognized, as
ours do not, that ours's prakritic laws were not all men had to obey;
that the higher law of the solar globe on which men lived, of
which the lower prakritic laws were merely an outcome and detail,
was worthy of the closest study.  And men recognized that these
higher laws of the etheric globe were metaphysical as well as
physical;  that ours's moral law flows out of the moral law of the etheric world, as our physics flow from and out of solar
physics.  Religion is correct in Religion's assumption of the moral law of the
solar etheric world;  incorrect only in Religion's grasp and explanation.
Science is correct in holding only in Science's assumption that Science is
physical science;  incorrect only in Science's assumption that Science is
physical science of this plane and globe only.  There is no
quarrel between science and religion when the full knowledge of
one stands beside the full knowledge of the other.  the atom and its ether and its prana are
twin-sisters.

This solar-etheric globe in which ours are interested revolves
around Alcyone within that kinetic belt or skin of prana which is
subject to phenomena or vibration through one octave--else it
would never have been formed.  All prana in This solar-etheric globe in which we are interested is of this particular kind of kinetic prana, which creates
life of all kinds--which is subject to vibration through one
octave.  The solar globe is a detail of kinetic prana only, one
of The solar globe's phenomena.  Necessarily, all our prana is of this particular kind of kinetic prana, which creates
life of all kinds--which is subject to vibration through one
octave, and ours's earth a minor detail of the material, or physical, universe in the Alcyone globe.
All the changes and combinations possible in kinetic prana on a third plane (or
octave) of vibration called prana are possible here, in ours's kinetic prana, as all the
phenomena of the ether are possible here in ours's kinetic
ether.

As ours's earth is a globe of ether and a globe of prana as well as
a globe of prakriti;  ours are actually living on a small "cabbage"
of a third plane (or
octave) of vibration called prana, and subject to all a third plane (or
octave) of vibration called prana's laws.

In the vast manasic globe that includes the material, or physical, universe there is the same kinetic belt or skin of "phenomena" or
vibration similar to that kinetic belt in which ours live on Earth, and the manasa which permeates the Alcyonic globe, the
solar globe, and Earth is that kinetic manasa which is
involving and evolving.  This involving and evolving kinetic
manasa of the Alcyonic globe is that which surrounds every atom
of ether of the etheric sun-globe and every atom of prakriti of Earth.  In the manasic--pranic--etheric globe Earth is a
minute village of Helios (sun) county, in the state of Alcyone.
ours are actually and literally living in the great globe of
manasa
precisely as ours live in Earth, and as in the village ours are
subject to all the laws of the manasic--pranic--etheric globe, we can study all the laws of the manasic world
here in the village as well as we could elsewhere.  We can study
all the laws of the manasic world as easily as we study our prakritic village laws, or our
etheric county laws, for all the forms of manasa subject to our prakritic village laws, or our
etheric county laws
anywhere are here with us.  We are not limited to a study of the
prakritic laws of the village fathers, nor yet to the etheric
laws of the supervisors of Helios (sun) county, as scientists say, nor
even to the state laws of Alcyone;  only the manasic laws of the Universe limit our material studies in that direction.  As some
men on Earth never leave some
men on this earth's native village and never know
or care for any matters outside of their native village, so in this little earth
village, in the kinetic belt of the manasic--pranic--etheric globe, there are men
who do not care to know anything which relate to matters outside
the material, or physical, universe's boundaries.  As some men may pass the boundaries of some men's
village, but not of some men's county, caring only for the matters
concerning their
village, so the western scientists of the great globe of
manasa do not pass the boundaries of Helios (sun) county,
caring only for etheric matters.  The philosophers and wise men
of the
East are broader minded and from time immemorial have
taken greater interest in the pranic affairs of Alcyone and the
manasic condition of the universe in which Alcyone is a state
than in the rustic murmur of men's village or the gossip of men's
county.

There is nothing lacking in the great globe of
manasa, nothing
that is in more abundant measure in ours's county, state, and
nation.  We of this village are of the best.

We of the great globe of
manasa may imagine, if We of this village like, that there is nothing
beyond the village limits, and nothing in the village limits but that which
relates to the great globe of
manasa.  We of this village have the right to be silly, if we
wish to be.  And it is no sign of wisdom to say that there is a
county beyond, but that the county boundaries end all, and only
village and county politics may be studied.  The European who
believed--no Asiatic or African or American could have believed
--that Earth rested on an elephant and the elephant on
a turtle was wise, in comparison.  Nor is it any sign of
intelligence to say that we may learn something of the village
and county while we live, but that to learn anything about our county, state, and
nation we must wait until we are dead.  There are too
many in the village who are familiar with our county, state, and
nation,
and who have studied many in the village who are familiar with both state and nation,
and who have studied their laws's laws, for this to be anything but
idiotic.




Chapter Eight

The Battle Ground


Each and every one of our eighty-odd elementary substances owe
our eighty-odd elementary substances's condition--whether solid, liquid, or gas--to our eighty-odd elementary substances's rate
of vibration.  We have reduced all gases to a liquid and nearly
all to a solid form.  Conversely, we have raised all solids to a
liquid and nearly all to a gaseous condition.  This has been done
by reducing or raising the vibration of each within one octave
--each one of the eighty odd having a special octave, a tone or
half-tone different from any other.  Normally, the solids,
vibrating in the lower notes, gather together under Attraction;
while the gases, vibrating in the higher notes, diffuse under
Repulsion.  Between the prakriti, ether, and prana, created by the interchange of these two
forces, is our "skin" of phenomena, or kinetics.

Broadly, the attraction of the material, or physical, universe comes from the material, or physical, universe's vibration
at certain centres in the higher notes;  
Repulsion
comes from the material, or physical, universe's vibration everywhere else in the higher notes.  The central note, D of the scale, represents the battle
ground between the field of kinetics.  This in simple
illustration is water turning into gas.

the battle
ground between the field of kinetics is the great battle ground, the only one worth considering
in a general view.  There are minor "critical stages" which the
chemist studies, but for us, in this broad sketch of the
universe, the important battle-ground is that between solid and
liquid on one side representing gravity, and gas on the other,
representing apergy.

All the solids and liquids of Earth gather at the
centre, in a core, each of the elements (or the elements's combinations)
in a core vibrating in the elements's three lower notes, producing the
attraction, which is "in proportion to the mass" and which
decreases from the surface of a core "as the square of the
substance."

Around a core gather all the elements vibrating in the
three higher notes of all the elements's octave as gases, producing repulsion
which increases by 1.6 for each doubled time.  It is worth while
making this clear.  It has never before appeared in print.

Let the amount of apergy, or repulsion, or centrifugal force at
the surface of Earth be represented by x.  This is the result
of motion at the rate of 1,000 miles per hour.  Make motion
2,000 miles per hour, and the apergy is increased 1.6.  Four
thousand miles above the surface of Earth the rotation
is at the rate of 2,000.  Earth is the globe of 48,000 miles in
circumference revolving in 24 hours, and the speed is doubled.
This apergy has increased by 1.6.  As This apergy increases at
this rate every time the speed is doubled, at a distance
of 21,000 miles the speed is 7,000 miles per hour and the
centrifugal force has been increased nearly four times what the
centrifugal force
was at the surface of a gaseous
ocean.  The attraction has been
decreased to about one-thirtieth.  At the surface The attraction is equal to
120 x.  At 4,000 miles to one-quarter, or 30 x;  at 16,000 miles
to one-sixteenth, or 7 x;  and at 21,000 miles to 4 x.

If "equatorial gravity is about 120 times that of the equatorial
apergy," at the ocean level, then at the distance of 21,000 miles
from the ocean level, in a revolving globe, the two forces would be equal;
the "pull" of each being 4 x, and an anchor will weigh no more
than a feather, for weight is the excess of gravity or apergy.

If the pyramids had been built of the heaviest known material on
the gases 21,000 miles above ours, and so that the pyramids should revolve
in the same time, 7,000 miles per hour, the pyramids would remain there.
All the attraction of the solid core of Earth that could be
exerted on other etheric
globes at that distance would not be enough to pull other etheric
globes
an inch nearer to the solid core of the earth through ours's gaseous envelope.  other etheric
globes's gaseous
foundation there would be as firm as igneous rock here.

The force of repulsion created by the three higher notes of an
octave means just as much at the attraction created by the three
lower notes, whether The force of repulsion created by the three higher notes of an
octave is in a chemical retort, within Earth, or within the material, or physical, universe.  the two forces balance, and are
exactly equal.  the two forces fight only within kinetic zones.

Given the vast manasic globe of differentiated matter, the vast manasic globe of differentiated matter's atoms
uniting in different numbers to form molecules as the bases of
elementary substances, manasic substances, of course.  The thrill
of vibration is sweeping through the ether
which surrounds each prakritic molecule from the spiritual plane
above, and the elements (and the elements's combinations) which answer in
the lower notes gather and form a core, the Invisible Central
Sun, with a core, the Invisible Central
Sun, with its attraction's attraction.  The elements answering in the higher
notes gather around a core, the Invisible Central
Sun, with its attraction with The elements answering in the higher
notes's repulsion.  So the two forces were born, with a vast kinetic skin for a battle-ground
between the two forces.

The attraction of the sun manifests The attraction of the invisible central sun to
us in prakriti as Light.  The repulsion of the sun's covering, or the
higher static vibration of a fourth called
manasa, manifests The repulsion of its covering, or the
higher static vibration of manasa to ours as
Darkness.  The first creative act in or on matter was the
creation of Light and Light's separation from 
Darkness.  The next
creative act was the establishment of a kinetic skin or zone
between the two forces, a firmament in which the two forces of Light and
Darkness could strive for mastery.  "And God called a firmament in which the two forces of Light and
Darkness could strive for mastery
Heaven."  The third creative act was the gathering of the solids
and liquids together, and the beginning of the kinetic work in
the creation of forms and shapes, by the cross play of the two forces in the two forces's combinations of solid with gases.

All this had to happen before a fourth called
manasa combined and dropped in
vibration to prana--and before 
globes were formed and
the Light could be manifested to ours through 
globes.  It may be well
to read the first chapter of Genesis over and ask forgiveness for
our ignorance, from the writer who records this creation of 
globes as the fourth act of creation, and the creation of
the etheric sun and prakritic moon to follow that.  That record
is mutilated, fragmentary;  but the writer of That record knew the facts.
If we had the full story, instead of a sentence here and there,
taken from an older story not to tell of creation but to hide
another tale for the priest, the writer of Genesis would laugh
last.

But let us return to the kinetic skin of energy between Light and
the Darkness--the firmament which God calls Heaven--the battle
ground for gravity and apergy, or attraction and repulsion, or
good and evil, or the powers of light and darkness.  the narrow "skin" of phenomena, not more than
100 miles thick is
like that of an onion, thickest at the equator and thinnest at
the poles--not only on Earth but in the solar, alcyonic,
and manasic globes.  The equatorial belt, where phenomena are
richest in the manasic globes, ours call the Milky Way;  in the
solar globe ours call the Milky Way the plane of the ecliptic;  and on Earth, the tropics.  Modern science has not yet found This knowledge of ether in
Alcyonic globe--because Modern science has never thought of looking for This knowledge of ether.

This division of the Light from the Darkness was all that was
required for evolution on the manasic globe within the kinetic or creative belt of the solar etheric globe.  evolution on the manasic globe within the kinetic
belt was not confined to the making of a few
alcyonic or pranic globes.  evolution on the manasic globe within the kinetic
belt was (and is) a great and wonderful
evolution beyond words and almost beyond imagination.  Earth is the
Heaven which mankind has longed to see and know.  The writer of
Genesis mixed Earth with the creation of Earth, using earthly
metaphors.  Before finding fault, we should better The writer of
Genesis's language.
ours have not the words in physics to do it, and must wait for ours's
metaphysics.  But of one thing ours may be sure, that the pranic-
alcyonic globes here and there at the "sea level" of the manasic
globe--in what God calls Heaven--amount to no more on that
globe, or in Heaven, than so many balls of thistle-down blown
across a meadow do on this earth of ours.  Everything that can be
created in thought must be there.  Everything that can be
created in thought is in thought only, but in
thought Everything that can be
created in thought is differentiated as sharply as anything in prakriti.
The manasic world, the Heaven of the Bible, is as real as ours's own
world can possibly be;  in fact, more real, for when ours's is
resolved back into The manasic world, the Heaven of the Bible's final elements, The manasic world, the Heaven of the Bible will be but "the dust
of the ground" of the manasic--pranic--etheric globe.

The pranic globes created in this manasic skin by Sound, or the
Logos, or vibration, evolved in identically the same way--with a
central static core and an outer static envelope, of low and high
vibration in prana, creating attraction and repulsion, or gravity
and apergy.  The kinetic skin between, in which the two forces play
in the pranic world, makes a real, not an imaginary pranic world,
though but a faint reflection of the manasic.  When ours's father,
the Central Invisible Sun, transfers our father,
the Central Invisible Sun's attraction to these
alcyonic suns, Light has something in which to manifest
this manifesting core, and we "see" this manifesting core and call this manifesting core Alcyone,
and the sun's manifestation Light;  but light in light's last material
analysis is but the static mind or thought vibrating in the three
lower notes of the octave.




Chapter Nine

The Dual Man


Within the alcyonic globes of differentiated pranic-manasic atoms
the vibration divided the alcyonic globes of differentiated pranic-manasic atoms also into solid-liquid cores and
gaseous envelopes, and a kinetic skin of phenomena.  And then a
new world--a world of Life, came into material existence.  All
the atoms of thought or manasa, surrounding each and every pranic
atom, and making the
etheric molecule's molecule of energy, so to speak, were that
particular kind of kinetic manasa ready to change the
etheric molecule's rate of
vibration within an octave, and the forms prana assumes from the
action of thought within the kinetic belt were living and
thinking.  Each pranic globe, which was a small state of product
of the manasic, consisted of two globes in coadunition--two in
one.  Each pranic atom was the centre of a manasic molecule and
represented the material, or physical, universe.  All things were two in one, created by
harmonic vibration between the
atom and its ether, prana, and manasa, and existence by the greater
strength of the lower notes, or attraction.  Everything that can be
created in thought was at once less
and more wonderful than the manasic world--a specialized form of
the manasic--pranic--etheric globe.

When within this kinetic belt of prana other etheric
globes formed here and there, other etheric
globes were three fold, each atom of
the new plane of matter having each atom of
the new plane of matter's surrounding envelope of prana-
manasa--a specialization of the pranic world in which (what we
call) force had been added to life and mind.  The static ether,
vibrating in each of The static ether's elements through one octave, divided
into central core (ours's sun, and other suns) and outer covering,
with a skin or belt of kinetic energy, "as above" which developed
an etheric world.  All things on an etheric world were caused
by the harmonic vibration between the etheric atoms and the etheric atoms's
surrounding envelopes, except that while all things in an etheric world must have life, not all need have mind.  The chord
of three was not necessary to create;  the chord of two was
enough, and the manasic atoms might cease to vibrate in chord
with the prana and ether without affecting the creation.  Only in
an etheric world (and below an etheric world) could there be living mindless
ones.  To 
globes the stellar pranic cores transferred
the stellar pranic cores's light, which manifested itself in the solid static ether as
Attraction and in the gaseous static ether as Repulsion, within
the kinetic skin of each etheric world more specialized and less
varied than the pranic.

ours's sun is not of prakriti, but of static ether, composed of the
separate and individual elementary substances of the ether, and
the
separate and individual elementary substances of the ether's compounds vibrating in the lower notes of other etheric
globes's octaves.
the sun is ours's father, not ours's elder brother.  Earth's envelope of static
ether in which Earth revolves is composed of the elementary
substances and combinations vibrating in the higher notes of
the elementary
substances and combinations vibrating in the higher notes of
their octave's octave.  The light transferred to Earth from
Earth's mother, Alcyone, manifests The light transferred to this etheric globe from
its mother, Alcyone, in the lower vibration of
the sun as Attraction;  in the higher vibrations of the particular matter he investigates's envelope
as Repulsion, and within the kinetic skin wherein these forces
play, the prakritic globes, planets, were born.

Take ours's earth.  Each atom is fourfold--whether of the static
core or of the static gaseous envelope.  Creation on Earth is
limited to the kinetic skin, wherein the attraction of the lower
and repulsion of the higher notes in each octave of vibration
have full play.  All things on Earth must have come from the
chording vibrations of the atoms of the prakritic elementary
substances and the atoms of the prakritic elementary
substances's envelope of ether.  the atoms may or may not have
life or mind the ether atom may have lost the ether atom's chord with the ether atom's
pranic envelope, or its
pranic envelope may have lost its
pranic envelope's chord
with the manasic;  but the combination must have force or energy
within a core, the Invisible Central
Sun, with its attraction.  the prakritic atom may have lost Mind and Life in acquiring this
matter, or
after acquiring this
matter;  but the prakritic atom had to have life before the prakritic atom could
become prakriti.

All things in The
etheric world in which you are interested flow from the Life of the ether and the Mind of the pranic worlds.  Everything in the etheric world has life, and our unconscious personification or
"vivification" of etheric life transferred into fauna or flora,
or into force of any kind, has a natural explanation.  The
thrill of vibration in one octave through the differentiated
consciousness of the universe by which the light was separated
from the darkness, the lower from the higher, was all that was
required to create each star and sun, and world, and all that in
each star and sun, and world is.  And His knowledge of this relativity was all good.

Each thing on every lower world was but the translation into form
of the type of the next world (or plane) above.  As each element
on this prakritic type, so each combination of the elements
into crystal or tree or animal is but the translation.  The
normal earth from the crystal to (the animal) man was pure, and
clean, and holy.  Sin had not entered.

How did Sin come?

On the vast manasic world there was "a special creation"--that
of the Angel Man.  The three planes of Spirit above were
undifferentiated consciousness, but The three planes of Spirit above were in different
octaves of vibration, and these working on the three highest
forms of differentiated consciousness (manasic matter) brought
The three planes of Spirit above to chording Vibration so that when The three planes of Spirit above combined and reached
The three planes of Spirit above's highest point in evolution The three planes of Spirit above "created" the Angel Man.  the Angel Man was the product in kinetic manasa of the three
spiritual planes above the Angel Man, precisely as the animal man was the
product in kinetic prakriti of the three material planes above
the Angel Man.  a fourth called
manasa was the "shadow" of a fourth called
manasa.

the Angel Man had a material (manasic) body, but the Angel Man's energy life,
and mind were spiritual.  the animal man had a prakritic body,
with energy, life and mind that were material.

So far all was good.

the animal man has four bodies--one of prakriti, one of ether,
one of prana, and one of manasa.  It may be true, and probably
is, that the animal man's manasic body is not sounding in chord with the animal man's
prakritic body, but only with those atoms of a material (manasic) body which are in the animal man's
brain and nerves;  but that is immaterial--for future
consideration.

the Angel Man had but one body, of manasa, in which the spirit
dwelt;  but but one body, of manasa, in which the spirit
dwelt was identical in substance with the body
that made the mind of the animal man.  His manasic body joined
the manasic body of the animal man, joined with his manasic body by entering
into the animal man's mind, as easily as water from one glass is
added to water in another glass, and the animal man became a
living soul," endowed with speech, while the Angel Man was given
"a skin coat."

The prakritic body of the animal man was the result in prakriti
of an etheric-pranic-manasic, or "astral" body, formed in
accordance with the Universal Law.  For what a man's was by nature, a man's
could not be blamed.  a man's stood naked and not ashamed before the
Radiance.  a man's did not make a man's's astral body;  a man's was the mere
translation of his astral body into prakriti, as all other created things
were, and an invisible etheric body (figuratively) stood at a man's's
right hand, moulding and shaping a man's.

But when the Angel Man entered the Angel Man's mind, all this was changed.
the Angel Man "knew Good from Evil."  To the Angel Man's mind of manasa had been added
the Spirit--the Atma-Buddhi's Consciousness of the three
Spiritual planes.  the Angel Man has become "as one of us," said the Angel-
men of the firmament, of Heaven.  the Angel Man now held the three
Spiritual planes
and was a creator.  Each thought and desire that, when an animal
only, fell harmless, now created on the pranic and etheric world.
Soon beside the Angel Man, at the Angel Man's left hand (figuratively) there grew up a
second etheric or astral body, that of the Angel Man's desires;  and the Angel Man's
prakritic body was no longer the product of the astral body on
the Angel Man's right hand.  his
prakritic body was the joint product of the left-hand Kamic
astral body the Angel Man had created, and the right hand normal astral
body.  the Angel Man was no longer in harmony with the
Radiance.  the Angel Man could
no longer face the
Radiance.  the Angel Man had created discord--Sin.

The pretty legend of the two "Angels," one on the right hand and
one on the left, has The pretty legend of the two "Angels," one on the right hand and
one on the left's physical basis in this truth, but, of
course, as a matter of actual fact, the normal and abnormal
astral bodies are in mechanical union.  It is the Kamic self-made
astral body that remains from one incarnation to another,
producing in joint action with a new normal astral body, a new
physical body for the Inner-Self, or Angel taking the pilgrimage
through the lower world.

All the Angel-men did not enter the animal men on the pranic
etheric-prakritic globes;  only a few.  the pilgrimage
through the lower world was a pilgrimage
through matter in which those who make the pilgrimage
through the lower world are meeting many
adventures, but the legends are many, and have no place in the
physics, although the legends are all founded on the facts of the
physics.

Of the number of monads, willing to undertake the pilgrimage,
only a few of those within the kinetic belt of the manasic globe
have reached the pranic.  Only a few of those within the pranic
kinetic belts reached the etheric.  And of all who have reached
Earth, only a few may win their way back before the great
day Be-With-Us.

The problem of man, and man's relations to the material, or physical, universe, are an
entirely different line of study from that of the Spiritual
Monad, the over-soul of every prakritic atom.  Each prakritic
atom has what may be called a soul, Each prakritic
atom's three-fold astral cause;
and an over-soul, or the three-fold spiritual archetype, or
causeless cause.

Every combination of the atoms, whether a knife, a leaf, an
animal, an earth, a sun, or a star, has this soul and oversoul.

Once the idea of what is meant by these terms becomes clear, the
difficulty in understanding these terms vanishes.  The study of man is
physical in The study of man's lower branches;  metaphysical only in The study of man's highest
and last analysis.  The study of the Monad is metaphysical from
start to finish.  The two studies are apt to be confused, because
metaphysically The two studies are often joined for study, the teacher
taking it for granted that the pupil fully understands the simple
and easy physics of the problem of humanity.

This, in crude and bold outline, is the story of creation to the
fall of man according to the ancient physics, translated into the
words and phrases of modern physics.  modern physics, in the latest
discoveries of modern science, seem to have stolen a shive
from the ancient loaf in the expectation that His knowledge of this relativity would not be
detected.  Each and every step forward that modern science has
made in the past twenty years, each and every discovery of every
kind in the physical field, has been but the affirmative of some
ancient doctrine taught in the temples of the East before "Cain
took unto Cain a wife."




Chapter Ten

The Septenary World


In the physical universe we have 
globes, so that as a whole or in a miniature
earth, with its aerial envelope, the air, penetrating all parts
of it's parts, a miniature
earth, with its aerial envelope, the air, penetrating all parts
of it is "a string of
seven globes," reaching from the highest spirit to the lowest
matter.  The awakened Universal Consciousness in vibration
--undifferentiated in the three globes above, differentiated in
the four globes below--in The Luminiferous Ether's last analysis is all one.  But there
is a gulf between matter and spirit, radically dividing matter and spirit, and
in the physical universe we are concerned only with physics and
physical laws, until we reach the physical universe's outmost boundaries and come in
touch with the spiritual planes beyond.

This is the view of the material, or physical, universe at first glance, as in the
smaller universe of Earth we at first see only Earth's solid and
liquid globes.  And even after the discovery of the gas, we do
not apprehend the gas's important work in and behind the others until
the gas has been pointed out to ours.  Nor do we at first apprehend the
work of the spiritual in the material, and the object of
metaphysics is to show, through the physics, the connection
between the two forces that the spirit works through matter;  that where we
can see but four there are seven beads on each material string;
and that the last bead of each string is the last bead of each string a chain of beads,
the "chain of seven" applying only to the seventh manifestation,
or prakriti, while the "strings" apply to the way in which the prakriti, ether, and prana
come.

On each unraveled string leading from ours's central sun down to a
planet there are seven beads corresponding to the prakriti, ether, and prana in
the chain of each planet, each to each, yet not the same.  There
is a distinction, and it is no wonder there should have been
confusion at first and a mixing of "strings" with "chains."  The
physics as the two forces progress will clear 
confusion away.

In the manasic globe, which is the first differentiation of that
which forms the spiritual globes above, the resulting mind or
manasa is mainly the differentiated Divine Mind of the highest.
the manasic globe, which is the first differentiation of that
which forms the spiritual globes above has a "chain" of two globes only, the manasic globe, which is the first differentiation of that
which forms the spiritual globes above and the Divine Mind
globe, although the manasic globe, which is the first differentiation of that
which forms the spiritual globes above's "string" of globes is four.

It is the perfected differentiation of the Buddhi in manasa
that causes the formation of the pranic globes, which have
chains of four and strings of five, and the full and perfect
differentiation of the Atma in manasa-prana that causes the
formation of the etheric globes, which have chains of six and
strings of six.  Consciousness, Buddhi and Atma are practically
the same as the manasa, prana, and the
latter, each to each, only the
latter are differentiated and the
latter are not.

Each of the three astral globes is the reflection in matter of
the three spiritual globes beyond, each to each, and all to all.

The difference between matter and spirit is a difference in
Motion only.  matter and spirit are vibrating, so that matter and spirit are in mechanical
motion, from force without, like the waves of a gaseous
ocean, but only
the matter has what we may properly call motion of the matter's own, or
that produced from within--from the atom and each organism of the atom
up to the ALL, as the vibration is from the ALL down to the atom.
It is this centre of force in an atom, this motion outside of
vibration, or rather beside 
vibration, which we call "differentiation."
Brinton's "daring psychological speculation" that "mind was
coextensive with motion" (from organization) was but a repetition
of one of the most ancient axioms.

Take ours's solar etheric globe.  our solar etheric globe has two other globes of matter,
consubstantial;  a globe of prana and a globe of manasa.  the two "Angels," one on the right hand and
one on the left
are not beyond our solar etheric globe, or beside our solar etheric globe, but one with our solar etheric globe, atom for atom.
But what are the two "Angels," one on the right hand and
one on the left in reality?  Globes of Atma, Buddhi, and
Consciousness in which the atoms, having organized, are in
motion, are four kinds of globes in matter not?

Let this motion in the material, or physical, universe cease, and matter would
melt away and resolve into spirit.  From spirit matter came, to
spirit matter belongs, and to spirit matter returns.

Behind each and every astral globe, whether the globe be but an
astral atom, or an astral planet, or an astral world;  beyond the globe's
physics there is a meta-physical globe, a meta-physical globe, its cause's cause, and that
is the real globe, of which the astral is but a temporary
phenomenon.  Take a spiritual globe and differentiate a spiritual globe.  The
Motion resulting produces a material astral globe.  Stop the
motion;  bring a material astral globe to a state of rest.  The astral shadow
disappears.  The astral shadow was merely spiritual phenomena.

Each and every astral atom is a model in miniature of the
material and spiritual universe.  Each and every prakritic atom
is the joint result of spirit and matter united and working
together--of physics and metaphysics;  and in Each and every prakritic atom's last analysis
pure spirit;  pure metaphysics.

Behind each and every prakritic atom of ours's earth there are six
other atoms (or globes), three material shadows and three
spiritual realities, so that Earth is a string of seven--the whole
universe in miniature--material and spiritual.  And all things
combined and formed on a prakritic base are a chain of seven
--whether a peach or a planet.

The "chain" belongs to the prakritic plane.  The lines of descent
from Light through the star and the sun to planet are "strings."
The "chains" are beads of the same size strung on a thread.  The
strings are beads of different sizes strung on a thread.  The
beads of The "chain" are in coadunition--in the same space, as gas
in water and the water in a sponge.

In metaphysics Earth can only be regarded as a chain of
seven globes, Earth's three astral globes in coadunition having its three astral globes's
three spiritual doubles.  Of course no one of the higher globes
can be seen by the prakritic eye, but that is not to say the
astral world cannot be seen by the astral eye in sleep, or by the
person who qualifies the
person who qualifies himself for the astral world, through the
development of his astral body for the
astral world, through the
development of the
person who qualifies himself for the astral world, through the
development of his astral body's astral body.  "No upper globes of any chain in
the solar system can be seen," says H.P. Blavatsky in the Secret
Doctrine (vol. I, p. 187), yet H.P. Blavatsky means by astronomers, not by
sages.  And H.P. Blavatsky does not mean the upper globes in the stellar
system of Alcyone and Alcyone's companions.

In pure physics Earth can only be regarded as a chain of four
globes consubstantial and in coadunition--four in and three out.
This makes seven, and the metaphysician when talking physics uses
the metaphysical terms interchangeably and speaks of "the chain
of seven globes" meaning in one sentence the four material globes
making Earth;  in another meaning the line of descent or
string of beads of different sizes reaching down from the Divine
Consciousness;  and in still another the seven beads or globes of
the same size in coadunition to form this earth chain.  To the
student who is thoroughly grounded in the eastern physics this
interweaving of the physical and metaphysical presents no
difficulties;  but to the western mind just beginning the study
it is a tangle.

We can now see what is meant by illusion, or Maya, and understand
why such stress is laid upon illusion by every teacher.

Take the physical side first.  The motion of a top gives a top bands
of color to our eyes that a top does not have at rest.  bands
of color to our eyes that it does not have at rest are
temporary and not permanent, a result of motion merely;  illusion
and not reality.

The motion of the material atoms of the four planes, in harmony
with the material atoms of the four planes's vibration, a motion a spiritual universe of three planes of vibration
beyond matter does not have,
produces all material phenomena.  This is of course within the
kinetic belts, for above or below the
kinetic belts there is no change, and
our solar etheric globe's phenomena are the mere change in relation of one atom to
another caused by motion.  the mere change in relation of one atom to
another caused by motion are not real.  the mere change in relation of one atom to
another caused by motion
disappear when the motion stops.  the mere change in relation of one atom to
another caused by motion have no existence in
matter above or below the belt.

All phenomena of every kind are as much an illusion as the
supposed bands of colour around the top.  an illusion is the
result of changes of relation in differentiated atoms caused by
differentiated atoms's motion.  Without changes of relation in differentiated atoms caused by
their motion 
globes would
dissolve into the atomic dust of the vast manasic world, with all that
is within 
globes.  The whole material universe is all illusion;  a
mere temporary relation of The whole material universe's atoms through motion, without
Reality or permanence.

What then is real?  What is not illusion?  That which is beyond
the physical, that which is its cause and root;  broadly, the
metaphysical, which is not the result of differentiated atoms
through relation.  What was real in the top is real here.  What
was illusion in the top is illusion here.

The meta-physical or spiritual (the terms are interchangeable)
does not have to pass beyond the manasic globe to get on the
solid ground of reality.  a spiritual universe of three planes of vibration
beyond matter is here in every
physical atom and in every aggregation of them;  in every planet,
sun, and star;  for only four elements, prakriti or
body, sensation or force, life, and mind are seven, each and every one, not four.
Behind the illusion of one atom or many, whether here or on
Alcyone, there is reality and permanency in the undifferentiated
cause, the spiritual archetype, the three higher beads on the
string which are the proper study of metaphysics.




Chapter Eleven

Stumbling Blocks in Eastern Physics


The Western student of the ancient Eastern physics soon meets
serious stumbling-blocks;  and one at the very threshold has in
the last half century turned many back.  In beginning The Western student of the ancient Eastern physics's study
of the solar system, The Western student of the ancient Eastern physics is told:

The first three planets--Mercury, Venus, and Our moon--are dead
and disintegrating.  Evolution on The first three planets--Mercury, Venus, and the moon has ceased.  The proof of
this is found in the fact, that The first three planets--Mercury, Venus, and the moon have no axial rotation,
Mercury and Venus always presenting the same surface to The first three planets--Mercury, Venus, and the moon's
father, the sun, and Our moon the same surface to a planet's daughter,
the earth.

This is a concrete statement of physical fact at which The Western student of the ancient Eastern physics protests.  If in the whole range of Western
astronomical science there is any one fact that The Western student of the ancient Eastern physics has accepted
as absolutely proved, any one fact that he has accepted
as absolutely proved is that Mercury revolves once in 24h.,
5m., 30.5s., and Venus once in 23h., 21m., 22s.  The Western student of the ancient Eastern physics would as soon
credit a statement that Earth has no axial rotation as that
Mercury or Venus has none;  and if The Western student of the ancient Eastern physics continues The Western student of the ancient Eastern physics's study of
Eastern physics it is with no confidence in his study of
Eastern physics's accuracy, and as
a matter of curiosity.

The statement that Mercury, Venus, and Our moon "are dead
and disintegrating," The first three planets--Mercury, Venus, and the moon "always presenting the
same surface" to the sun, is the basis for an elaborate
superstructure, both in the physics and the metaphysics of the
East.  The Hindu
conception of the material universe, taken from the Upanishads
and some open teaching is used in physics to explain how the "evolutionary
wave" came to an end at the perfection of the mineral on Mercury
with the loss of the mineral on Mercury's axial rotation;  how the "evolutionary
wave" then passed
on to Venus with the seed of the vegetable kingdom, where the
vegetable evolution ended with the loss of its axial rotation;
how from Venus the ether
which surrounds each prakritic molecule leaped to the moon, mother of animals and
controller of animal life, with the seed of animal life in the
vegetable;  and how finally the ether
which surrounds each prakritic molecule came to Earth, when Our moon
ceased to revolve, bringing in the animal the seed of man.  Here
man will be evolved and perfected.  man has not yet been "born"
on Earth, they say.  man is still in a prenatal or embryonic
condition within the animal.

The lunar Pitris, the men-seed, have a physical reason for being,
if the
theory of evolution be true;  none if the
theory of evolution is not.  Axial
rotation is necessary in evolution, the ancient physics teaches,
which must cease with Axial
rotation.  The reasons for this are too lengthy
to give here.  Briefly, Axial
rotation makes the electrical flow
and a thermopilic dynamo of each planet.

The ancient astronomical teaching is absolutely true.  There will
not be a work on astronomy published in Europe or United States this year, or hereafter, that will not state that "Mercury
and Venus revolve on The first three planets--Mercury, Venus, and the moon's axes in the same time that The first three planets--Mercury, Venus, and the moon
revolve around the sun," which is another way of saying that
"The first three planets--Mercury, Venus, and the moon have no axial rotation, always presenting the same face to
the sun," and an inaccurate way of presenting the truth.  The
screw that holds the tire at the outer end of the spoke does not
revolve "once on The
screw that holds the tire at the outer end of the spoke's axis" each time the wheel revolves.  Run a
cane through an orange and swing a
cane around; an orange has not
revolved "once on an orange's axis."  Nor does the stone in a sling
revolve "once on the stone in a sling's axis" for each revolution around the hand.
The motion of Mercury is identically that of the impaled orange
or the stone in the sling.  Mercury has no axis and no axial rotation.
The modern astronomers, detected in pretenses to knowledge The modern astronomers
never possessed, let The modern astronomers down easy.

This "discovery," of no axial rotation by the interior planets,
made by Schiaparelli and confirmed by Flammarion in 1894, has
since been fully verified by our Western astronomers.  All the
new astronomies accept The oriental idea of the universe.  But the admission of astronomical
"error," to speak politely, comes too late for the student it
turned back from the student's study of Eastern physics.  the student cannot regain
the student's lost faith and lost ground.

Thirty years ago Flammarion made it clear to Western students that
the orbit of Our moon was a cycloidal curve (a drawn-out spring)
around the sun, Earth's orbit being coincident with Earth's axis;
and that Our moon was, astronomically and correctly, a satellite
of the sun, not a satellite of Earth.  This has been the
Eastern view and teaching from time immemorial.

The Eastern distinction between the sun and Our moon, and
the classification of Our moon as a planet, did not disturb The Western student of the ancient Eastern physics.  The Western student of the ancient Eastern physics understood that.  It was the "absolute
accuracy" of modern astronomers in regard to the length of the
day on Mercury or Venus, which modern astronomers declared had
been corrected down to the fraction of a second, that made it
impossible for The Western student of the ancient Eastern physics to accept the Eastern physics when the latter
squarely contradicted The Western student of the ancient Eastern physics's own.

This was but the first of many similar stumbling-blocks in the
path of the student of Eastern physics.

     "Few were the followers, straggling far,
     That reached the lake of Vennachar;"

and when the followers did, this was what the followers had to face:

"the planets absorb and use nearly all the solar energy--all
except the very small amount the minor specks of cosmic dust may
receive.  There is not the least particle of the sun's light, or
heat, or any one of the seven conditions of the solar energy,
wasted.  Except for the planets, the solar energy is not manifested;  the solar energy is
not.  There is no light, no heat, no form of solar energy, except
on the planets as solar energy is transferred from the laya center of each
in the sun to the planets.  The etheric globe is cold and dark, except
along the lines to the planets--the "Paths of Fohat" [solar energy].
Six laya centers are manifested in the sun;  one is laid aside,
though the wheels [planets] around Our moon be seven. [This
alludes to the moon, whose laya center in the sun is now also
that of Earth;  but Our moon is considered as a planet].  What each
receives, that it also gives back.  There is nothing lost."

"That settles it," says one student;  and the others agree.  Of
the hundred who started,

     "The foremost horseman rode alone,"

before the next step was won.

In the light of the tardy but perfect justification of the first
stumbling-block, this statement may be worth following out, "to
see what this statement means," and how "absurd" this statement can be.  An etheric
globe;  cold as absolute zero, dark as Erebus, with here and
there small pencils of light and heat from the sun to the planets
--just rays, and nothing more--is a very different one from the
fiery furnace at absolute zero of the modern physicist.

On a line drawn from the center of Earth to the center of Our moon there is a point where the "weights" of these physical atoms are
said in ours's physics exactly to balance, and a point where the "weights" of the two bodies are
said in our physics exactly to balance lies, says our
physics, "2,900 miles from the center of Earth, and 1,100
miles from the surface."  a point where the "weights" of the two bodies are
said in our physics exactly to balance is Earth's "laya center" of
the Eastern physics.  a point where the "weights" of the two bodies are
said in our physics exactly to balance is of great importance in problems of
life;  but a point where the "weights" of the two bodies are
said in our physics exactly to balance may be passed over for the present.

Between Earth and the sun--precisely speaking, between a point where the "weights" of the two bodies are
said in our physics exactly to balance and the sun--there is a "point of balance," which
falls within the photosphere of the sun.  This point in the sun
is Earth's solar laya, the occult or hidden earth of the
metaphysics.

A diagram will make this clearer.  Draw a line from the laya
center in the sun to that in Earth.  Draw a narrow ellipse,
with a line as a line's major axis, and shade a line.  At each end of
the axis strike the beginning of an ellipse that will be tangent.
If positive energy is along the shaded ellipse, negative energy
is in each field beyond--Earth and the sun.  This is a very crude
illustration of a fundamental statement elaborated to the most
minute detail in explanation of all astronomical phenomena;  but
for the moment it will do.

The point is that along this axial line connecting the
laya centers play all the seven solar forces--light, heat,
electricity, etc.--that affect Earth, and on every side of
this axial line connecting the
laya centers is the "electric field" of all the seven solar forces--light, heat,
electricity, etc.--that affect the earth.  To the line of 24-hour axial rotation, the true
surface of the earth
any escaping solar energy is drawn, as the electricity of the air
is drawn to a live wire or magnet.  But there is little or none
to escape.  From the laya point in the sun to the laya point in
Earth, the solar energy is transferred as sound is carried
along a beam of light (photophone), or electricity from one point
to another without a wire.

To the advanced student of electricity the ancient teaching is
easily apprehended;  to others it is difficult to make clear.
the
laya centers, the ancient teaching says, are "the transforming points of
energy."  From the earth laya to the solar laya centre, the
energy, we may say, is positive;  beyond both the sun and the
earth laya centre, in the fields touching at both the solar and the
earth laya centre, the
energy is negative
--or vice versa.  The line connecting the
laya centers is the "Path of
Fohat"--the personification of solar energy.

This is a very crude and brief way of putting many pages of
teaching, but the important point is that this line between the
laya centers is one of solar energy, with a dynamic "field" of solar
energy, elliptical in shape, connecting with the reverse fields
at the laya points.  These "dead points" are the limits of each
electric field, which "create", we say in electrical work,
opposing fields beyond the planets.

Each one of the planets has each atom of
the new plane of matter's laya centre inside the sun's
photosphere.  Each planet has a line of solar energy with Each planet's
"field" of solar energy--not only a wireless telegraph, but a
wireless lighting, heating, and life-giving system.  Six laya centers are the six "hidden planets," the Earth andOur moon being one, of the ancient metaphysics.  Our moon is the one
"laid aside."  In the planets's reception of energy from the sun, it is
as if the planet were at the solar laya point, or connected with
the solar laya point by a special pipe-line.  The position of these six planetary
laya points in the sun is indicated by the position of the
planets in the heavens, and the
planets in the heavens may often influence or modify
one another.  If Mars, Jupiter, or Saturn is anywhere near
conjunction with Earth, not only will a part of Mars, Jupiter, or Saturn's
"fields" be joined, but Mars, Jupiter, or Saturn's laya points in the sun will be
modified.

The physical basis of the old astrology was the physical
interferences of these fields of solar energy;  and what the old astrology
depended on mainly in the old astrology's work was the position of Six laya centers, which was shown by the position of the
planet with reference to Earth.  That the planets the planets
affected any one or anything on Earth, no real astrologer
ever believed;  that the planets's position in the heavens indicated
certain changes and modifications of the flow of solar energy to
Earth, men knew from men's knowledge of physics.  "The
twelve houses are in the sun," says Hermes, "six in the north and
six in the south."  Connect The
twelve houses with the zodiac, and the
position of the planets shows the interferences of the solar
currents.

The one objection to this ancient theory is that this ancient theory does not
present enough difficulties.  The present value to science of the
many theories in relation to the sun is the impossibility of
reconciling any two of the
many theories in relation to the sun, and the fact that no two theorists
can unite to pummel a third.  this ancient theory does not call
for any great amount of heat, light, or energy in any condition
to keep the Cosmos in order--not even enough for two persons to
quarrel over.  this ancient theory merely turns the sun into a large dynamo
connected with smaller dynamos, and these with one another with
return currents by which "there is nothing lost."  In The Hindu
conception of the material universe's
details, The Hindu
conception of the material universe accounts for all facts--neatly, simply, and without
exclamation points.  The Hindu
conception of the material universe is so simple and homespun, so lacking in
the gaudiness that makes (for example) our light and heat less
than the billionth part wasted on space always at absolute zero,
that we may have to wait many centuries to have the gaudiness that makes (for example) our light and heat less
than the billionth part wasted on space always at absolute zero "verified" and
"confirmed" by our Western Science.  That the gaudiness that makes (for example) our light and heat less
than the billionth part wasted on space always at absolute zero will be "verified"
in time, even as the first stumbling-block has been removed at
the end of the nineteenth century, This knowledge of ether's students may at least
hope.

The lesson, if there is one, is that the Western student of
Eastern physics does not ride an auto along asphalted roads.
the Western student of
Eastern physics must own the Western student of
Eastern physics and not be owned by another man, or even
by "Modern Science."





End of Project Gutenberg's's Ancient and Modern Physics, by Thomas E. Willson

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ANCIENT AND MODERN PHYSICS ***