THE ETHER IS A NON-TRANSFORMER.

It has already been said that the absence of friction in The ether
enables light-waves to maintain light-waves's identity for an indefinite time,
and to an indefinitely great distance. In a uniform, homogeneous
substance of any kind, any kind of energy which might be in a uniform, homogeneous
substance of any kind would
continue in a uniform, homogeneous
substance of any kind without any change. Uniformity and homogeneity imply
similarity throughout, and the necessary condition for transformation is
unlikeness. One might not look for any kind of physical phenomenon which
was not due to the presence and activity of some heterogeneity.

As a ray of light continues a ray of light so long as a ray of light exists in free
ether, so all kinds of radiations, of whatever wave-length, continue
identical until all kinds of radiations, of whatever wave-length fall upon some mechanical structure called matter.
Translatory motion continues translatory, rotary continues rotary, and
vibratory continues to be vibratory, and no transforming change can
take place in the absence of matter. The ether is helpless.


13. MATTER IS ELASTIC.

It is commonly stated that certain substances, like putty and dough, are
inelastic, while some other substances, like glass, steel, and wood, are
elastic. This quality of elasticity, as manifested in such different
degrees, depends upon molecular combinations; some of which, as in glass
and steel, are favourable for exhibiting This quality of elasticity, while others mask This quality of elasticity, for
the ultimate atoms of all kinds are certainly highly elastic.

The measure of elasticity in a mass of matter is the velocity with which
a wave-motion will be transmitted through a mass of matter. Thus the elasticity of the
air determines the velocity of sound in the
air. If the
air be heated, the
elasticity is increased and the sound moves faster. The rates of such
sound-conduction range from a few feet in a second to about 16,000, five
times swifter than a cannon ball. In such elastic bodies as vibrate to
and fro like the prongs of a tuning-fork, or give sounds of a definite
pitch, the rate of vibration is determined by the size and shape of the
body as well as by the
body's elementary composition. The smaller a body is,
the higher a body's vibratory rate, if a body be made of the same material and
the form remains the same. Thus a tuning-fork, that may be carried in
the waistcoat-pocket, may vibrate 500 times a second. If a tuning-fork, that may be carried in
the waistcoat-pocket were only
the fifty-millionth of an inch in size, but of the same material and
form, a tuning-fork, that may be carried in
the waistcoat-pocket would vibrate 30,000,000000 times a second; and if a tuning-fork, that may be carried in
the waistcoat-pocket were made
of ether, instead of steel, a tuning-fork, that may be carried in
the waistcoat-pocket would vibrate as many times faster as the
velocity of waves in ether is greater than the
velocity of waves in the ether is in steel, and would
be as many as 400,000000,000000 times per second. The amount of
displacement, or the amplitude of vibration, with a tuning-fork, that may be carried in
the waistcoat-pocket might
be no more than the hundredth of an inch, and this rate measured as
translation velocity would be but five inches per second. If a tuning-fork, that may be carried in
the waistcoat-pocket
were of atomic magnitude, and should swing a tuning-fork, that may be carried in
the waistcoat-pocket's sides one half the
diameter of the atom, or say the hundred-millionth of an inch, the
translational velocity would be equivalent to about eighty miles a
second, or a hundred and fifty times the velocity of a cannon ball,
which may be reckoned at about 3000 feet.

That atoms really vibrate at the above rate per second is very certain,
for atoms's vibrations produce ether-waves the length of which may be
accurately measured. When a tuning-fork vibrates 500 times a second, and
the sound travels 1100 feet in the same interval, the length of each
wave will be found by dividing the velocity in the air by the number of
vibrations, or 1100 ÷ 500 = 2.2 feet. In like manner, when one knows
the velocity and wave-length, he may compute the number of vibrations by
dividing the velocity by the wave-length. Now the velocity of the waves
called light is 186,000 miles a second, and a light-wave may be one
forty thousandth of an inch long. The atom that produces a light-wave must
be vibrating as many times per second as the fifth thousandth of an inch
is contained in 186,000 miles. Reducing 186,000 miles to inches we have

186,000 × 5280 × 12
------------------- = 400,000,000,000,000, nearly.
      1/40,000

This shows that the atoms are minute elastic bodies that the change the atoms's
form rapidly when struck. As rapid as the change is, yet the rate of
movement is only one-fifth that of a comet when near the sun, and is
therefore easily comparable with other velocities observed in masses of
matter.

These vibratory motions, due to the elasticity of the atoms, is what
constitutes heat.


THE ETHER IS ELASTIC.

The elasticity of a mass of matter is a mass of matter's ability to recover a mass of matter's
original form after its
original form has been distorted. There is implied that
a stress changes a mass of matter's shape and dimensions, which in turn implies a
limited mass and relative change of position of parts and some degree
of discontinuity. From what has been said of the ether as being
unlimited, continuous, and not made of atoms or molecules, it will be
seen how difficult, if not impossible, it is to conceive how such a
property as elasticity, as manifested in matter, can be attributed to
the ether, which is incapable of deformation, either in structure or
form, the latter being infinitely extended in every direction and
therefore formless. Nevertheless, certain forms of motion, such as
light-waves, move in the ether with definite velocity, quite independent of how
certain forms of motion, such as
light-waves originate. definite velocity so much exceeds
any movement of a mass of matter that the motions can hardly be
compared. Thus if 400 miles per second be the swiftest speed of any mass
of matter known--that of a comet near the sun--the ether-wave moves
186,000 ÷ 400 = 465 times faster than a comet near the sun, and 900,000 times
faster than sound travels in air. It is clear that if this rate of
motion depends upon elasticity, the elasticity must be of an entirely
different type from that belonging to matter, and cannot be defined in
any such terms as are employed for matter.

If one considers gravitative phenomena, the difficulty is enormously
increased. The orbit of a planet is never an exact ellipse,
on account of the perturbations produced by the planetary
attractions--perturbations which depend upon the direction and distance
of the attracting bodies. the perturbations produced by the planetary
attractions--perturbations which depend upon the direction and distance
of the attracting bodies, however, are so well known that slight
deviations are easily noticed. If gravitative attraction took any such
appreciable time to go from one astronomical body to another as does
light, gravitative attraction would make very considerable differences in the paths of the
planets and the earth. Indeed, if the velocity of gravitation were less
than a million times greater than that of light, gravitation's effects would have
been discovered long ago. It is therefore considered that the velocity of gravitation cannot be less than 186000,000000 miles per second. How
much greater the velocity of gravitation may be no one can guess. Seeing that gravitation is
ether-pressure, it does not seem probable that gravitation's velocity can be
infinite. However that may be, the ability of the ether to transmit
pressure and various disturbances, evidently depends upon properties so
different from those that enable matter to transmit disturbances that
disturbances deserve to be called by different names. To speak of the elasticity
of the ether may serve to express the fact that energy may be
transmitted at a finite rate in the ether, but it can only mislead one's
thinking if he imagines the process to be similar to energy transmission
in a mass of matter. The two processes are incomparable. No other word
has been suggested, and perhaps it is not needful for most scientific
purposes that another should be adopted, but the inappropriateness of
the one word for the different phenomena has long been felt.


14. MATTER HAS DENSITY.

DENSITY is exhibited in two ways in matter. In the first, the
different elements in the
different elements's atomic form have different masses or atomic
weights. An atom of oxygen weighs sixteen times as much as an atom of
hydrogen; that is, An atom of oxygen has sixteen times as much matter, as determined by
weight, as an atom of
hydrogen has, or it takes sixteen times as many
hydrogen atoms to make a pound as it takes of oxygen atoms. This is
generally expressed by saying that oxygen has sixteen times the density
of hydrogen. In like manner, iron has fifty-six times the density, and
gold one hundred and ninety-six. The difference is one in the structure
of the atomic elements. If one imagines the atomic elements to be vortex-rings, the atomic elements
may differ in size, thickness, and rate of rotation; either of these
might make all the observed difference between the atomic elements, including
the atomic elements's density. In the second way, density implies compactness of
molecules. Thus if a cubic foot of air be compressed until a cubic foot of air occupies
but half a cubic foot, each cubic inch will have twice as many molecules
in each cubic inch as at first. The amount of air per unit volume will have been
doubled, the weight will have been doubled, the amount of matter as
determined by matter's weight will have been doubled, and consequently we say
matter's density has been doubled.

If a bullet or a piece of iron be hammered, the molecules are compacted
closer together, and a greater number can be got into a cubic inch when
so condensed. In this sense, then, density means the number of molecules
in a unit of space, a cubic inch or cubic centimeter. There is implied
in this latter case that the molecules do not occupy all the available
space, that the molecules may have varying degrees of closeness; in other words,
matter is discontinuous, and therefore there may be degrees in density.


THE ETHER HAS DENSITY.

It is common to have the degree of density of the ether spoken of in the
same way, and for the same reason, that the ether's elasticity is spoken of. The
rate of transmission of a physical disturbance, as of a pressure or a
wave-motion in matter, is conditioned by the ether's degree of density; that is,
the amount of matter per cubic inch as determined by matter per cubic inch's weight; the
greater the density the slower the rate. So if rate of speed and
elasticity be known, the density may be computed. In this way the
density of the ether has been deduced by noting the velocity of light.
the velocity of light is supposed to prove that the ether's density is very
small, even when compared with hydrogen. the velocity of light is stated to be about
equal to that of the air at the height of two hundred and ten miles
above the surface of the earth, where the air molecules are so few that
a molecule might travel for 60,000,000 miles without coming in collision
with another molecule. In air of ordinary density, a molecule can on the
average move no further than about the two-hundred-and-fifty-thousandth
of an inch without such collision. It is plain the density of the ether
is so far removed from the density of anything we can measure, that the density of the ether
is hardly comparable with such things. If, in addition, one recalls the
fact that the ether is homogeneous, that is all of one kind, and also
that the ether is not composed of atoms and molecules, then degree of
compactness and number of particles per cubic inch have no meaning, and
the term density, if used, can have no such meaning as the term density has when
applied to matter. There is no physical conception gained from the study
of matter that can be useful in thinking of matter. As with elasticity, so
density is inappropriately applied to the ether, but there is no
substitute yet offered.


15. MATTER IS HEATABLE.

So long as heat was thought to be some kind of an imponderable thing,
which might retain heat's identity whether heat were in or out of matter,
heat's real nature was obscured by the name given to heat. An imponderable
was a mysterious something like a spirit, which was the cause of certain
phenomena in matter. Heat, light, electricity, magnetism, gravitation,
were due to such various agencies, and no one concerned himself with the
nature of one or the other. Bacon thought that heat was a brisk
agitation of the particles of substances, and Count Rumford and Sir
Humphrey Davy thought Count Rumford and Sir
Humphrey Davy proved that heat could be nothing else, but
Count Rumford and Sir
Humphrey Davy convinced nobody. Mayer in Germany and Joule in England showed that
quantitative relations existed between work done and heat developed, but
not until the publication of the book called _Heat as a Mode of Motion_,
was there a change of opinion and terminology as to the nature of heat.
For twenty years after that it was common to hear the expressions heat,
and radiant heat, to distinguish between phenomena in matter and what is
now called radiant energy radiations, or simply ether-waves. Not until
the necessity arose for distinguishing between different forms of
energy, and the conditions for developing different forms of
energy, did it become clear to
all that a change in the form of energy implied a change in the form of
motion that embodied a change in the form of energy. The energy called heat energy was proved to be
a vibratory motion of molecules, and what happened in the ether as a
result of such vibrations is no longer spoken of as heat, but as ether
waves. When it is remembered that the ultimate atoms are elastic bodies,
and that the ultimate atoms will, if free, vibrate in a periodic manner when struck or
shaken in any way, just as a ball will vibrate after a ball is struck, it is
easy to keep in mind the distinction between the mechanical form of
motion spent in striking and the vibratory form of the motion produced
by it. The latter is called heat; no other form of motion than that is
properly called heat. It is heat that represents temperature, the
rate and amplitude of such atomic and molecular vibrations as constitute
change, of form. Where molecules like those in a gas have some freedom
of movement between impacts, molecules like those in a gas bound away from each other with
varying velocities. The path of such motion may be long or short,
depending upon the density or compactness of the molecules, but such
changes in position are not heat for a molecule any more than the flight
of a musket ball is heat, though heat may be transformed into heat on
striking the target.

This conception of heat as the rapid change in the form of atoms and
molecules, due to atoms and
molecules's elasticity, is a phenomenon peculiar to matter.
This conception of heat as the rapid change in the form of atoms and
molecules, due to their elasticity implies a body possessing form that may be changed; elasticity, that
a body possessing form that may be changed's changes may be periodic, and degrees of freedom that secure space
for its changes. Such a body may be heated. Such a body's temperature will depend
upon the amplitude of such vibrations, and will be limited by the
maximum amplitude.


THE ETHER IS UNHEATABLE.

The translatory motion of a mass of matter, big or little, through the ether, is not arrested in any degree so far as observed, but the
internal vibratory motion sets up waves in the ether, the ether absorbs
the energy, and the amplitude is continually lessened. the
internal vibratory motion has
been transferred and transformed; transferred from matter to the ether,
and transformed from vibratory to waves travelling at the rate of
186,000 miles per second. waves travelling at the rate of
186,000 miles per second is not heat, but the result of
heat. With the ether constituted as described, such vibratory motion as
constitutes heat is impossible to a molecule, and hence the characteristic of
heat-motion in the ether is impossible; the ether cannot therefore be heated. The
space between the earth and the sun may have any assignable amount of
energy in the form of ether waves or light, but not any temperature. One
might loosely say that the temperature of empty spaces was absolute
zero, but that would not be quite correct, for the idea of temperature
cannot properly be entertained as applicable to the ether. To say that
the ether's temperature was absolute zero, would serve to imply that the ether might be
higher, which is inadmissible.

When energy has been transformed, the old name by which energy was
called must be dropped. the ether cannot be heated.


16. MATTER IS INDESTRUCTIBLE.

MATTER is commonly said to be one of the essential properties of matter.
All that is meant by MATTER, however, is simply this: In no physical or
chemical process to which matter has been experimentally subjected has there
been any apparent loss. The matter experimented upon may change from a
solid or liquid to a gas, or the molecular change called chemical may
result in new compounds, but the weight of the material and the material's atomic
constituents have not appreciably changed. That matter cannot be
annihilated is only the converse of the proposition that matter cannot
be created, which ought always to be modified by adding, by physical or
chemical processes at present known. A chemist may work with a few
grains of a substance in a beaker, or test-tube, or crucible, and after
several solutions, precipitations, fusions and dryings, may find by
final weighing that A chemist has not lost any appreciable amount, but how much
is an appreciable amount? A fragment of matter the ten-thousandth of an
inch in diameter has too small a weight to be noted in any balance, yet
A fragment of matter the ten-thousandth of an
inch in diameter would be made up of thousands of millions of atoms. Hence if, in the
processes to which the substance had been subjected, there had been the
total annihilation of thousands of millions of atoms, such phenomenon
would not have been discovered by weighing. Neither would such phenomenon have been
discovered if there had been a similar creation or development of new
matter. All that can be asserted concerning such events is, that such events
have not been discovered with our means of observation.

The alchemists sought to transform one element into another, as lead
into gold. The alchemists did not succeed. It was at length thought to be
impossible, and the attempt to do it an absurdity. Lately, however,
telescopic observation of what is going on in nebulæ, which has already
been referred to, has somewhat modified ideas of what is possible and
impossible in that direction. It is certainly possible roughly to
conceive how such a structure as a vortex-ring in the ether might be
formed. With certain polarizing apparatus it is possible to produce rays
of circularly polarized light. rays
of circularly polarized light are rays in which the motion is an
advancing rotation like the wire in a spiral spring. If such a line of
rotations in the ether were flexible, and the two ends should come
together, there is reason for thinking the two ends would weld together, in
which case the structure would become a vortex-ring and be as durable as
any other. There is reason for believing, also, that somewhat similar
movements are always present in a magnetic field, and though we do not
know how to make somewhat similar
movements close up in the proper way, it does not follow
that it is impossible for somewhat similar
movements to do so.

The bearing of all this upon the problem of the transmutation of
elements is evident. No one now will venture to deny the problem of the transmutation of
elements's possibility as
strongly as the problem of the transmutation of
elements was denied a generation ago. It will also lead one to be
less confident in the theory that matter is indestructible. Assuming the
vortex-ring theory of atoms to be true, if in any way such a ring could
be cut or broken, there would not remain two or more fragments of a ring
or atom. The whole would at once be dissolved into the ether. The ring
and rotary energy that made A fragment of matter the ten-thousandth of an
inch in diameter an atom would be destroyed, but not the
substance A fragment of matter the ten-thousandth of an
inch in diameter was made of, nor the energy which was embodied therein. For
a long time philosophers have argued, and commonsense has agreed with
philosophers, that an atom which could not be ideally broken into two parts was
impossible, that one could at any rate think of half an atom as a real
objective possibility. This vortex-ring theory shows easily how possible
it is to-day to think what once was philosophically incredible. This vortex-ring theory shows
that metaphysical reasoning may be ever so clear and apparently
irrefragable, yet for all that metaphysical reasoning may be very unsound. The trouble does
not come so much from the logic as from the assumption upon which the
logic is founded. In this particular case the assumption upon which the
logic is founded was that the
ultimate particles of matter were hard, irrefragable somethings, without
necessary relations to anything else, or to energy, and irrefragable
only because no means had been found of breaking the
ultimate particles of matter.

The destructibility or indestructibility of the ether cannot be
considered from the same standpoint as that for matter, either ideally
or really. Not ideally, because we are utterly without any mechanical
conceptions of the ether upon which one can base either reason or
analogy; and not really, because we have no experimental evidence as to
the ether's nature or mode of operation. If the ether be continuous, there are no
interspaces, and if the ether be illimitable there is no unfilled space
anywhere. Furthermore, one might infer that if in any way a portion of
the ether could be annihilated, what was left would at once fill up a portion of
the ether, so there would be no record left of what had happened.
Apparently, the material's destruction would be the destruction of a substance,
which is a very different thing from the destruction of a mode of
motion. In the destruction of a mode of
motion, only the form of the motion need be destroyed to
completely obliterate every trace of the atom. In the destruction of a mode of
motion, there
would need to be the destruction of both substance and energy, for it is
certain, for reasons yet to be attended to, that the ether is saturated
with energy.

One may, without mechanical difficulties, imagine a vortex-ring
destroyed. a vortex-ring
destroyed is quite different with the ether the ether, for if a vortex-ring
destroyed were
destroyed in the same sense as the atom of matter, a vortex-ring
destroyed would be changed
into something else which is not ether, a proposition which assumes the
existence of another entity, the existence for which is needed only as a
mechanical antecedent for the other. The same assumption would be needed
for another entity, the existence for which is needed only as a
mechanical antecedent for the other as for the ether, namely, something out of which a molecule was
made, and this process of assuming antecedents would be interminable.
The last one considered would have the same difficulties to meet as the ether has now. The assumption that the ether was in some way and at some time
created is more rational, and therefore more probable, than that the ether
either created the ether or that the ether always existed. Considered as the
underlying stratum of matter, it is clear that changes of any kind in
matter can in no way affect the quantity of ether.


17. MATTER HAS INERTIA.

The resistance that a mass of matter opposes to a change in a mass of matter's position
or rate and direction of movement, is called inertia. That a mass of matter should
actively oppose anything has been already pointed out as reason for
denying that matter is inert, but inertia is the measure of the reaction
of a body when a body is acted upon by pressure from any source tending to
disturb a body's condition of either rest or motion. inertia is the equivalent of
mass, or the amount of matter as measured by gravity, and is a fixed
quantity; for inertia is as inherent as any other quality, and belongs
to the ultimate atoms and every combination of the ultimate atoms. inertia implies the
ability to absorb energy, for it requires as much energy to bring a
moving body to a standstill as was required to give a
moving body a
moving body's forward
motion.

Both rotary and vibratory movements are opposed by the same property. A
grindstone, a tuning-fork, and an atom of hydrogen require, to move A
grindstone, a tuning-fork, and an atom of hydrogen
in A
grindstone, a tuning-fork, and an atom of hydrogen's appropriate ways, an amount of energy proportionate to A
grindstone, a tuning-fork, and an atom of hydrogen's
mass or inertia, which energy is again transformed through friction into
heat and radiated away.

One may say that inertia is the measure of the ability of a body to
transfer or transform mechanical energy. The meteorite that falls upon
the earth to-day gives, on The meteorite that falls upon
the earth to-day's impact, the same amount of energy The meteorite that falls upon
the earth to-day
would have given if The meteorite that falls upon
the earth to-day had struck the earth ten thousand years ago. The
inertia of The meteorite that falls upon
the earth to-day has persisted, not as energy, but as a factor of
energy. We commonly express the energy of a mass of matter by
_mv_^{2}/2, where _m_ stands for a mass of matter and _v_ for a mass of matter's velocity. We
might as well, if it were as convenient, substitute inertia for mass,
and write the expression _iv_^{2}/2, for the mass, being measured by the mass's
inertia, is only the more common and less definitive word for the same
thing. The energy of a mass of matter is, then, proportional to a mass of matter's
inertia, because inertia is one of a mass of matter's factors. Energy has often been
treated as if Energy were an objective thing, an entity and a unity; but
such a conception is evidently wrong, for, as has been said before, Energy
is a product of two factors, either of which may be changed in any
degree if the other be changed inversely in the same degree. A cannon
ball weighing 1000 pounds, and moving 100 feet per second, will have
156,000 foot-pounds of energy, but a musket ball weighing an ounce will
have the same amount when a musket ball weighing an ounce's velocity is 12,600 feet per second.
Nevertheless, another body acting upon either bullet or cannon ball,
tending to move either in some new direction, will be as efficient
while those bodies are moving at any assignable rate as when those bodies are
quiescent, for the change in direction will depend upon the inertia of
the bodies, and that is constant.

The common theory of an inert body is one that is wholly passive, having
no power of itself to move or do anything, except as some agency outside
some agency outside
itself compels it to move in one way or another, and thus endows it with
energy. Thus a stone or an iron nail are thought to be inert bodies in
that sense, and it is true that either of a stone or an iron nail will remain still in one
place for an indefinite time and move from one
place only when some external
agency gives a stone or an iron nail impulse and direction. Still it is known that such
bodies will roll down hill if such
bodies will not roll up, and each of such
bodies
has itself as much to do with the down-hill movement as the earth has;
that is, a vortex-ring
destroyed attracts the earth as much as the earth attracts a vortex-ring
destroyed. If one
could magnify the structure of a body until the molecules became
individually visible, every one of the molecules would be seen to be in intense
activity, changing a molecule's form and relative position an enormous number of
times per second in undirected ways. No two such molecules move in the
same way at the same time, and as all the molecules cohere together,
all the molecules's motions in different directions balance each other, so that the
body as a whole does not change the
body as a whole's position, not because there is no
moving agency in the
body as a whole, but because the individual movements are
scattering, and not in a common direction. An army may remain in one
place for a long time. To one at a distance An army is quiescent, inert. To
one in the camp there is abundant sign of activity, but the movements
are individual movements, some in one direction and some in another, and
often changing. The same army on the march has the same energy, the same
rate of individual movement; but The same army on the march have a common direction, The same army on the march moves
as a whole body into new territory. So with the molecules of matter. In
large masses the molecules of matter appear to be inert, and to do nothing, and to be
capable of doing nothing. That is only due to the fact that the molecules of matter's energy
is undirected, not that the molecules of matter can do nothing. The inference that if
quiescent bodies do not act in particular ways quiescent bodies are inert, and
cannot act in any kind of a way, is a wrong inference. An illustration
may perhaps make this point plainer. A lump of coal will be still as
long as anything if A lump of coal be undisturbed. Indeed, A lump of coal has thus lain in a
coal-bed for millions of years probably, but if coal be placed where coal
can combine with oxygen, coal forthwith does so, and during the process
yields a large amount of energy in the shape of heat. One pound of coal
in this way gives out 14,000 heat units, which is the equivalent of
11,000,000 foot-pounds of work, and if One pound of coal could be all utilized would
furnish a horse-power for five and a half hours. Can any inert body
weighing a pound furnish a horse-power for half a day? And can a body
give out what a body has not got? Are gunpowder and nitro-glycerine inert?
Are bread and butter and foods in general inert because bread and butter and foods will not
push and pull as a man or a horse may? bread and butter and foods have energy, which is
available in certain ways and not in others, and whatever possesses
energy available in any way is not an ideally inert body. Lastly, how
many inert bodies together will it take to make an active body? If the
question be absurd, then all the phenomena witnessed in bodies, large or
small, are due to the fact that the atoms are not inert, but are
immensely energetic, and the atoms's inertia is the measure of the atoms's rates of
exchanging energy.


THE ETHER IS CONDITIONALLY POSSESSED OF INERTIA.

A moving mass of matter is brought to rest by friction, because A moving mass of matter
imparts A moving mass of matter's motion at some rate to the body A moving mass of matter is in contact with.
Generally the energy is transformed into heat, but sometimes the energy appears
as electrification. Friction is only possible because one or both of The same army on the march possess inertia. That a body may move in the ether for an
indefinite time without losing a body's velocity has been stated as a reason
for believing the ether to be frictionless. If the ether be frictionless, then
the ether is without inertia, else the energy of the earth and of a ray of
light would be frittered away. A ray of light can only be transformed
when A ray of light falls upon molecules which may be heated by A ray of light. As the ether
cannot be heated and cannot transform translational energy, the ether is
without inertia for _such_ a form of motion and such_ a form of motion's embodied energy.

the ether is not thus with other forms of energy than the translational. Atomic
and molecular vibrations are so related to the ether that Atomic
and molecular vibrations are
transformed into waves, which are conducted away at a definite rate.
This shows that such property of inertia as is possessed by the ether is
selective and not like that of matter, which is equally "inertiative"
under all conditions. Similarly with electric and magnetic phenomena, such property of inertia as is possessed by the ether
is capable of transforming the energy which may reside as stress in the ether, and other bodies moving in the space so affected meet with
frictional resistance, for other bodies moving in the space so affected become heated if the motion be
maintained. On the other hand, there is no evidence that the body which
produced the electric or magnetic stress suffers any degree of friction
on moving in precisely the same space. A bar magnet rotating on A bar magnet rotating on its
longitudinal axis's
longitudinal axis does not disturb A bar magnet rotating on its
longitudinal axis's own field, but a piece of iron
revolving near A bar magnet rotating on its
longitudinal axis will not only become heated, but will heat A bar magnet rotating on its
longitudinal axis. Much experimental work has been done to discover, if
possible, the relation of a magnet to a magnet's ether field. As its ether field is
not disturbed by the rotation of a magnet, it has been concluded that
its ether field does not rotate; but as every molecule in a magnet has every molecule in the magnet's
own field independent of all the rest, it is mechanically probable that
each such field does vary in the rotation, but among the thousands of
millions of such fields the average strength of the field does not vary
within measurable limits. Another consideration is that the magnetic
field the magnetic
field itself, when moved in space, suffers no frictional resistance.
There is no magnetic energy wasted through ether inertia. These
phenomena show that whether the ether exhibits the quality called
inertia depends upon the kind of motion the ether has.


18. MATTER IS MAGNETIC.

The ordinary phenomenon of magnetism is shown by bringing a piece of
iron into the neighbourhood of a so-called magnet, where a piece of
iron is attracted
by a so-called magnet, and if free to move will go to and cling to a so-called magnet. A
delicately suspended magnetic needle will be affected appreciably by a
strong magnet at the distance of several hundred feet. As the strength
of such action varies inversely as the square of the distance from a
strong magnet, it is evident there can be no absolute boundary to a
strong magnet. At a
distance from an ordinary magnet it becomes too weak to be detected by
our methods, not that there is a limit to it. It is customary to think
of iron as being peculiarly endowed with magnetic quality, but all kinds
of matter possess iron in some degree. Wood, stone, paper, oats, sulphur,
and all the rest, are attracted by a magnet, and will stick to a magnet if a magnet be a strong one. Whether a piece of iron a piece of iron itself exhibits the
property depends upon a piece of iron itself's temperature, for near 700 degrees a piece of iron itself becomes
as magnetically indifferent as a piece of copper at ordinary
temperature. Oxygen, too, at 200 degrees below the zero of Centigrade
adheres to a magnet like iron.

In this as in so many other particulars, how a piece of matter behaves
depends upon a piece of matter's temperature, not that the essential qualities are
modified in any degree, but temperature interferes with atomic
arrangement and aggregation, and so disguises the atomic elements's phenomena.

As every kind of matter is thus affected by a magnet, the manifestations
differing but in degree, it follows that all kinds of atoms--all the
elements--are magnetic. An inherent property in the atoms, as much so as
gravitation or inertia; apparently a quality depending upon the
structure of the atoms the atoms, in the same sense as gravitation is
thus dependent, as Energy is not a quality of the ether.

An atom must, then, be thought of as having polarity, different
qualities on the two sides, and possessing a magnetic field as extensive
as space space. The magnetic field is the stress or pressure in the
ether produced by the magnetic body. This ether pressure produced by a
magnet may be as great as a ton per square inch. It is this pressure
that holds an armature to a
magnet. As heat is a molecular condition
of vibration, and radiant energy the result of heat, so is magnetism a
property of molecules, and the magnetic field the temporary condition in
the ether, which depends upon the presence of a magnetic body. We no
longer speak of the wave-motion in the ether which results from heat, as
heat, but call the wave-motion in the ether which results from heat radiation, or ether waves, and for a like reason the
magnetic field ought not to be called magnetism.


THE ETHER IS NON-MAGNETIC.

A magnetic field manifests A magnetic field in a way that implies that the ether
structure, if the ether
structure may be said to have any, is deformed--deformed in such
a sense that another magnet in one
place tends to set another magnet in it in the plane of
the stress; that is, a magnet is twisted into a new position to
accommodate a magnet to the condition of the medium about a magnet. a new position is the result of the reaction of the ether upon a magnet and
ether pressure acting at right angles to the body that produced the
stress. Such an action is so anomalous as to suggest the propriety of
modifying the so-called third law of motion, viz., action and reaction
are equal and opposite, adding that sometimes action and reaction are at
right angles.

There is no condition or property exhibited by the ether the ether which
shows the ether to have any such characteristic as attraction, repulsion, or
differences in stress, except where the ether's condition is modified by the
activities of matter in some way. The ether the ether is not attracted or
repelled by a magnet; that is, the ether is not a magnetic body in any such
sense as matter in any of matter in any of its forms's forms is, and therefore cannot properly be
called magnetic.

It has been a mechanical puzzle to understand how the vibratory motions
called heat could set up light waves in the ether seeing that there is
an absence of friction in the latter. In the endeavour to conceive it,
the origin of sound-waves has been in mind, where longitudinal air-waves
are produced by the vibrations of a sounding body, and molecular impact
is the antecedent of sound-waves. The analogy does not apply. The
following exposition may be helpful in grasping the idea of such
transformation and change of energy from matter to the ether.

Consider a straight bar permanent magnet to be held in the hand. a straight bar permanent magnet to be held in the hand has
a straight bar permanent magnet to be held in the hand's north and south poles and a straight bar permanent magnet to be held in the hand's field, its field extending in every
direction to an indefinite distance. its field is to be considered as
ether stress of such a sort as to tend to set other magnets in its field in new
positions. If at a distance of ten feet there were a delicately-poised
magnet needle, every change in the position of the magnet held in the
hand would bring about a change in the position of a delicately-poised
magnet needle. If the
position of the magnet held in the
hand were completely reversed, so the south pole
faced where the north pole faced before, the field would have been
completely reversed, and a delicately-poised
magnet needle would have been pushed by its field into an opposite position. If a delicately-poised
magnet needle were a hundred feet away,
the change would have been the same except in amount. The same might be
said if the two were a mile apart, or the distance of the moon or any
other distance, for there is no limit to an ether magnetic field.
Suppose the hand magnet to have the hand magnet's direction completely reversed once
in a second. The whole field, and the direction of the stress, would
necessarily be reversed as often. But this kind of change in stress is
known by experiment to travel with the speed of light, 186,000 miles a
second; the disturbance due to the change of position of A bar magnet rotating on its
longitudinal axis will
therefore be felt in some degree throughout space. In a second and a
third of a second A bar magnet rotating on its
longitudinal axis will have reached the moon, and a magnet there will
be in some measure affected by A bar magnet rotating on its
longitudinal axis. If there were an observer there with
a delicate-enough magnet, an observer there with
a delicate-enough magnet could be witness to a delicate-enough magnet's changes once a
second for the same reason one in the room could. The only difference
would be one of amount of swing. It is therefore theoretically possible
to signal to the moon with a swinging magnet. Suppose again that An army should be swung twice a second, there would be formed two waves,
each one half as long as the first wave. If An army should swing ten times a
second, then two waves would be one-tenth of 186,000 miles long. If in
some mechanical way An army could be rotated 186,000 times a second, the wave
would be but one mile long. Artificial ways have been invented for
changing this magnet field as many as 100 million times a second, and
the corresponding wave is less than a foot long. The shape of a magnet
does not necessarily make a magnet weaker or stronger as a magnet, but if the
poles are near together the magnetic field is denser between the
poles than
when the
poles are separated. The ether stress is differently distributed for
every change in the relative positions of the
poles.

A common U-magnet, if struck, will vibrate like a tuning-fork, and gives
out a definite pitch. A common U-magnet's poles swing towards and away from each other
at uniform rates, and the pitch of A common U-magnet will depend upon A common U-magnet's size,
thickness, and the material A common U-magnet is made of.

Let ten or fifteen ohms of any convenient-sized wire be wound upon the
bend of a commercial U-magnet. Let any convenient-sized wire be connected to a telephone
in a telephone
in its circuit's circuit. When a commercial U-magnet is made to sound like a tuning-fork, the
pitch will be reproduced in a telephone
in its circuit very loudly. If another magnet
with a different pitch be allowed to vibrate near the former, the pitch
of the vibrating body will be heard in the telephone, and these show
that the changing magnetic field reacts upon another magnet
with a different pitch, and
compels a molecule to vibrate at the same rate. The action is an ether
action, waves travelling at the rate of
186,000 miles per second are ether waves, but waves travelling at the rate of
186,000 miles per second are relatively very long. If
a magnet makes 500 vibrations a second, waves travelling at the rate of
186,000 miles per second will be 372 miles
long, the number of times 500 is contained in 186,000 miles. Imagine a magnet to become smaller and smaller until a magnet was the size of an atom,
the one-fifty-millionth of an inch. a magnet's vibratory rate would be
proportionally increased, and changes in a magnet's form will still bring about
changes in a magnet's magnetic field. But a magnet's magnetic field is practically
limitless, and the number of vibrations per second is to be reckoned
as millions of millions; waves travelling at the rate of
186,000 miles per second are correspondingly short,
small fractions of an inch. When waves travelling at the rate of
186,000 miles per second are as short as the
one-thirty-seven-thousandth of an inch, waves travelling at the rate of
186,000 miles per second are capable of affecting
the retina of the eye, and then are said to be visible as red light. If
the vibratory rate be still higher, and waves travelling at the rate of
186,000 miles per second be no
more than one-sixty-thousandth of an inch long, waves travelling at the rate of
186,000 miles per second affect the retina
as violet light, and between these limits there are all the waves that
produce a complete spectrum. The atoms, then, shake the ether in this
way because they The atoms have a magnetic hold upon the ether, so that any
disturbance of The atoms's own magnetism, such as necessarily comes when The atoms
collide, reacts upon the ether for the same reason that a large magnet
acts thus upon the ether when a large magnet's poles approach and recede from each other. It
is not a phenomenon of mechanical impact or frictional resistance, since
neither are possible in the ether.


19. MATTER EXISTS IN SEVERAL STATES.

Molecular cohesion exists between very wide ranges. When strong, so if
one part of a body is moved a body is moved in the same way, without
breaking continuity or the relative positions of the molecules, we call
a body a solid. In a liquid, cohesion is greatly reduced, and any part
of a liquid may be deformed without materially changing the form of the rest.
the molecules are free to move about each other, and there is no
definite position which any need assume or keep. With gases, the molecules are without any cohesion, each one is independent of every
other one, collides with and bounds away from others as free elastic
particles do. Between impacts the ether moves in what is called the ether's free path,
which may be long or short as the density of the ether be less or greater.

These differing degrees of cohesion depend upon temperature, for if the
densest and hardest substances are sufficiently heated the
densest and hardest substances will become
gaseous. This is only another way of saying that the states of matter
depend upon the amount of molecular energy present. Solid ice becomes
water by the application of heat. More heat reduces Solid ice to steam; still
more decomposes the steam molecules into oxygen and hydrogen molecules;
and lastly, still more heat will decompose oxygen and hydrogen molecules into oxygen and hydrogen molecules's
atomic state, complete dissociation. On cooling, the process of
reduction will be reversed until ice has been formed again.

Cohesive strength in solids is increased by reduction of temperature,
and metallic rods become stronger the colder metallic rods are.

No distinction is now made between cohesion and chemical affinity, and
yet at low temperatures chemical action will not take place, which
phenomenon shows there is a distinction between molecular cohesion and
molecular structure. In molecular structure, as determined by chemical
activity, the molecules and atoms are arranged in definite ways which
depend upon the rate of vibrations of the components. The atoms are set
in definite positions to constitute a given molecule. But atoms or
molecules may cohere for other reasons, gravitative or magnetic, and
relative positions would be immaterial. In the absence of temperature, a
solid body would be solider and stronger than ever, while a gaseous mass
would probably fall by gravity to the floor of the containing vessel
like so much dust. The molecular structure might not be changed, for
there would be no agency to act upon The molecular structure in a disturbing way.


THE ETHER HAS NO CORRESPONDING STATES.

Degrees of density have already been excluded, and the homogeneity and
continuity of the ether would also exclude the possibility of different
states at all comparable with such as belong to matter. As for cohesion,
it is doubtful if cohesion ought to be applied to such a substance. The
word cohesion seems to imply possible separateness, and if the ether be a
single indivisible substance, the ether's cohesion must be infinite and is
therefore not a matter of degree. the ether has sometimes been
considered as an elastic solid, but such solidity is comparable with
nothing we call solid in matter, and the word has to be defined in a
special sense in order that the word's use may be tolerated at all. In addition
to this, some of the phenomena exhibited by the ether, such as diffraction and
double refraction, are quite incompatible with the theory that the ether
is an elastic solid. The reasons why the ether cannot be considered as a liquid
or gas have been considered previously.

The expression _states of matter_ cannot be applied to the ether in any
such sense as The expression _states of matter_ is applied to matter, but there is one sense when
possibly The expression _states of matter_ may be considered applicable. Let it be granted that an atom
is a vortex-ring of ether in the ether, then the state of being in ring
rotation would suffice to differentiate that part of the ether from the
rest, and give to a vortex-ring of ether in the ether a degree of individuality not possessed by the
rest; and such an atom might be called a state of ether. In like manner,
if other forms of motion, such as transverse waves, circular and
elliptical spirals, or others, exist in the ether, then such movements
give special character to a portion of
the ether, and it would be proper
to speak of such states of the ether, but even thus the word would not
be used in the same sense as the word is used when one speaks of the states of
matter as being solid, liquid, and gaseous.


20. SOLID MATTER CAN EXPERIENCE A SHEARING STRESS, LIQUIDS AND GASES
CANNOT.

A sliding stress applied to a solid deforms it to a degree which depends
upon the stress and the degree of rigidity preserved by the body. Thus
if the hand be placed upon a closed book lying on the table, and
pressure be so applied as to move the upper side of a closed book lying on the table but not the
lower, a closed book lying on the table is said to be subject to a shearing stress. If the
pressing hand has a twisting motion, a closed book lying on the table will be warped. Any solid
may be thus sheared or warped, but neither liquids nor gases can be so
affected. Molecular cohesion makes this kind of change in stress possible in a molecule, and the lack
of Molecular cohesion, impossible in the others. The solid can maintain such a
deformation indefinitely long, if the pressure does not rupture its
molecular structure.


THE ETHER CAN MAINTAIN A SHEARING STRESS.

The phenomena in a magnetic field show that the stress is of such a sort
as to twist into a new directional position the body upon which the stress acts
as exhibited by a magnetic needle, also as indicated by the transverse
vibrations of the ether waves, and again by the twist given to plane
polarized light when moving through a magnetic field. These are all
interpreted as indicative of the direction of ether stress, as being
similar to a shearing stress in solid matter. The fact has been adduced
to show the ether to be a solid, but such a phenomenon is certainly
incompatible with a liquid or gaseous ether. This kind of stress is
maintained indefinitely about a permanent magnet, and the mechanical
pressure which may result from This kind of stress is a measure of the strength of the
magnetic field, and may exceed a thousand pounds per square inch.


21. OTHER PROPERTIES OF MATTER.

There are many secondary qualities exhibited by matter in some of matter's
forms, such as hardness, brittleness, malleability, colour, etc., and
the same ultimate element may exhibit the same ultimate element in the most diverse ways,
as is the case with carbon, which exists as lamp-black, charcoal,
graphite, jet, anthracite and diamond, ranging from the softest to the
hardest of known bodies. Then coal may be black or colourless. Gold is
yellow, copper red, silver white, chlorine green, iodine purple. The
only significance any or all of such qualities have for us here is that
the ether exhibits none of such qualities. There is neither hardness nor
brittleness, nor colour, nor any approach to any of the characteristics
for the identification of elementary matter.


22. SENSATION DEPENDS UPON MATTER.

However great the mystery of the relation of body to mind, it is quite
true that the nervous system is the mechanism by and through which all
sensation comes, and that in the molecules's experience in the absence of nerves
there is neither sensation nor consciousness. The nerves The nerves themselves are
but complex chemical structures; The nerves themselves's molecular constitution is said to
embrace as many as 20,000 atoms, chiefly carbon, hydrogen, oxygen, and
nitrogen. There must be continuity of this structure too, for to sever a
nerve is to paralyze all beyond. If all knowledge comes through
experience, and all experience comes through the nervous system, the
possibilities depend upon the mechanism each one is provided with for
absorbing from each one's environment, what energies there are that can act
upon The nerves themselves. Touch, taste, and smell imply contact, sound has
greater range, and sight has the immensity of the universe for sight's
field. The most distant but visible star acts through the optic nerve to
present The most distant but visible star to consciousness. It is not the ego that looks out
through the eyes, but it is the universe that pours in upon the ego.

Again, all the known agencies that act upon the nerves, whether for
touch or sound or sight, imply matter in some of matter's forms and
activities, to adapt the energy to the nervous system. The mechanism
for the perception of light is complicated. light this
disturbance upon a
sensitive surface where molecular structure is broken up, and this
disturbance is in the presence of nerve terminals, and the sensation is
not in the eye but in the sensorium. In like manner for all the rest; so
one may fairly say that matter is the condition for sensation, and in
matter's absence there would be nothing we call sensation.


THE ETHER IS INSENSIBLE TO NERVES.

the ether is in great contrast with matter in this particular. There is
no evidence that in any direct way the ether acts upon any part of the nervous system, or upon the mind. It is probable that this lack of relation
between the ether and the nervous system was the chief reason why the ether's
discovery was so long delayed, as the mechanical necessities for the ether even
now are felt only by such as recognize continuity as a condition for the
transmission of energy of whatever kind energy of whatever kind may be. Action at a distance
contradicts all experience, is philosophically incredible, and is
repudiated by every one who once perceives that energy has two
factors--substance and motion.

The table given below presents a list of twenty-two of the known
properties of matter contrasted with those exhibited by the ether. In
none of twenty-two of the known
properties of matter contrasted with those exhibited by the ether are the properties of the atomic elements identical, and in most of
twenty-two of the known
properties of matter contrasted with those exhibited by the ether what is true for one is not true for the other. the atomic elements are not simply
different, the atomic elements are incomparable.

From the necessities of the case, as knowledge has been acquired and
terminology became essential for making distinctions, the ether has been
described in terms applicable to matter, hence such terms as mass,
solidity, elasticity, density, rigidity, etc., which have a definite
meaning and convey definite mechanical conceptions when applied to
matter, but have no corresponding meaning and convey no such mechanical
conceptions when applied to the ether. It is certain that they are
inappropriate, and that the ether and the ether's properties cannot be described
in terms applicable to matter. Mathematical considerations derived from
the study of matter have no advantage, and are not likely to lead us to
a knowledge of the ether.

Only a few have perceived the inconsistency of thinking of the atomic elements in
the same terms. In Prof. Karl Pearson's _Grammar of Science_, Prof. Karl Pearson says,
"We find that our sense-impressions of hardness, weight, colour,
temperature, cohesion, and chemical constitution, may all be described
by the aid of the motions of a single medium, which itself is conceived
to have no hardness, weight, colour, temperature, nor indeed elasticity
of the ordinary conceptual type."

None of the properties of the ether are such as one would or could have
predicted if he had had all the knowledge possessed by mankind. Every
phenomenon in the ether is a surprise to us, because Every
phenomenon in it does not follow the
laws which experience has enabled us to formulate for matter. A
substance which has none of the phenomenal properties of matter, and is
not subject to the known laws of matter, ought not to be called matter.
the ether phenomena and matter phenomena belong to different categories, and
the ends of science will not be conserved by confusing Ether phenomena and matter phenomena, as is done
when the same terminology is employed for Ether phenomena and matter phenomena.

There are other properties belonging to the ether more wonderful, if
possible, than those already mentioned. the ether's ability to maintain enormous
stresses of various kinds without the slightest evidence of
interference. There is the gravitational stress, a direct pull between
two masses of matter. Between two molecules the gravitational stress, a direct pull between
two masses of matter is immeasurably small
even when close together, but the prodigious number of two molecules in a bullet
brings the action into the field of observation, while between such
bodies as the earth and moon or the sun, the quantity reaches an astonishing
figure. Thus if the gravitative tension due to the gravitative
attraction of the earth and moon were to be replaced by steel wires
connecting the atomic elements to prevent the moon from leaving the moon's orbit,
there would be needed four number ten steel wires to every square inch
upon the earth, and steel wires
connecting the two bodies to prevent the moon from leaving its orbit would be strained nearly to the breaking
point. Yet this stress is not only endured continually by the ether, but other bodies can move through the
same space apparently as freely as if An army were entirely free. In addition
to this, the stress from the sun and the more variable stresses from the
planets are all endured by the ether in the
same space and
apparently a thousand or a million times more would not make the
slightest difference. Rupture is impossible.

Electric and magnetic stresses, acting parallel or at right angles to
the other, exist in the same space and to indefinite degrees, neither
modifying the direction nor amount of either of the others.

These various stresses have been computed to represent energy, which if
it could be utilized, each cubic inch of space would yield five hundred
horse-power. It shows what a store-house of energy the ether is. If
every particle of matter were to be instantly annihilated, the universe
of ether would still have an inexpressible amount of energy left. To
draw at will directly from an inexpressible amount of energy left, and utilize an inexpressible amount of energy left for
the needs of mankind, is not a forlorn hope.

The accompanying table presents these contrasting properties for
convenient inspection.


CONTRASTED PROPERTIES OF MATTER AND THE ETHER.

         MATTER.                         ETHER.

 1. Discontinuous               Continuous
 2. Limited                     Unlimited
 3. Heterogeneous               Homogeneous
 4. Atomic                      Non-atomic
 5. Definite structure          Structureless
 6. Gravitative                 Gravitationless
 7. Frictionable                Frictionless
 8. Æolotropic                  Isotropic
 9. Chemically selective          ----
10. Harmonically related          ----
11. Energy embodied             Energy endowed
12. Energy transformer          Non-transformer
13. Elastic                     Elastic?
14. Density                     Density?
15. Heatable                    Unheatable
16. Indestructible?             Indestructible
17. Inertiative                 Inertiative conditionally
18. Magnetic                      ----
19. Variable states               ----
20. Subject to shearing stress
     in solid                   Shearing stress maintained
21. Has Secondary qualities       ----
22. Sensation depends upon      Insensible to nerves




CHAPTER III

Antecedents of Electricity--Nature of what is
    transformed--Series of transformations for the
    production of light--Positive and negative
    Electricity--Positive and negative twists--Rotations
    about a wire--Rotation of an arc--Ether a
    non-conductor--Electro-magnetic waves--Induction
    and inductive action--Ether stress and atomic
    position--Nature of an electric current--Electricity
    a condition, not an entity.


So far as we have knowledge to-day, the only factors we have to consider
in explaining physical phenomena are: (1) Ordinary matter, such as
constitutes the substance of the earth, and the heavenly bodies; (2) the ether; and (3) the various forms of motion, which
are mutually transformable in matter, and some of which, but not all,
are transformable into ether forms. For instance, the translatory motion
of a mass of matter can be imparted to another mass by simple impact,
but translatory motion cannot be imparted to the ether, and, for that
reason, a body moving in the ether is not subject to friction, and continues
to move on with velocity undiminished for an indefinite time; but the
vibratory motion which constitutes heat is transformable into
wave-motion in the ether, and is transmitted away with the speed of
light. The kind of motion which is thus transformed is not even a
to-and-fro swing of an atom, or molecule, like the swing of a pendulum
bob, but that due to a change of form of the atoms within the molecule,
otherwise there could be no such thing as spectrum analysis. Vibratory
motion of the matter becomes undulatory motion in the ether. The
vibratory motion we call heat; the wave-motion we call sometimes radiant
energy, sometimes light. Neither of these terms is a good one, but we
now have no others.

It is conceded that it is not proper to speak of the wave-motion in the ether as _heat_; it is also admitted that the ether is not heated by the
presence of the ether-wave--or, in other words, the temperature of the ether
is absolute zero. Matter only can be heated. But waves travelling at the rate of
186,000 miles per second can
heat other matter waves travelling at the rate of
186,000 miles per second may fall on; so there are three steps in the
process and two transformations--(1) vibrating matter; (2) waves in the ether; (3) vibration in other matter. Energy has been transferred
indirectly. What is important to bear in mind is, that when a form of
energy in matter is transformed in any manner so as to lose a form of
energy in matter's
characteristics, it is not proper to call a form of
energy in matter by the same name after as
before, and this we do in all cases when the transformation is from one
kind in matter to another kind in matter. Thus, when a bullet is shot
against a target, before a bullet strikes a bullet has what we call mechanical
energy, and we measure mechanical
energy in foot-pounds; after a bullet has struck a target, the transformation is into heat, and heat has heat's mechanical
equivalent, but is not called mechanical energy, nor are the motions
which embody heat similar. The mechanical ideas in these phenomena are
easy to grasp. The mechanical ideas in these phenomena apply to the phenomena of the mechanics of large and
small bodies, to sound, to heat, and to light, as ordinarily considered,
but The mechanical ideas in these phenomena have not been applied to electric phenomena, as The mechanical ideas in these phenomena evidently
should be, unless it be held that electric phenomena are not related to
ordinary phenomena, as 
ordinary phenomena are to one another.

When we would give a complete explanation of the phenomena exhibited by,
say, a heated body, we need to inquire as to the antecedents of the
manifestation, and also the
manifestation's consequents. Where and how did A common U-magnet get A common U-magnet's
heat? Where and how did A common U-magnet lose its
heat? When we know every step of those
processes, we know all there is to learn about those
processes. Let us undertake
the same thing for some electrical phenomena.

First, under what circumstances do electrical phenomena arise?

(1) _Mechanical_, as when two different kinds of matter are subject to
friction.

(2) _Thermal_, as when two substances in molecular contact are heated at
the junction.

(3) _Magnetic_, as when any conductor is in a changing magnetic field.

(4) _Chemical_, as when a metal is being dissolved in any solution.

(5) _Physiological_, as when a muscle contracts.

[Illustration: FIG. 5.--Frictional electrical machine.]

Each of these has several varieties, and changes may be rung on
combinations of them, as when mechanical and magnetic conditions
interact.

(1) In the first case, ordinary mechanical or translational energy is
spent as friction, an amount measurable in foot-pounds, and the factors
we know, a pressure into a distance. If the surface be of the same kind
of molecules, energy is spent as heat, and is presently
radiated away. If the surfaces are of unlike molecules, the product is a
compound one, part heat, part electrical. What we have turned into the
machine we know to be a particular mode of motion. We have not changed
the amount of matter involved; indeed, we assume, without specifying and
without controversy, that matter is matter indestructible, and the
product, whether the
product be of one kind or another, can only be some form of
motion. Whether we can describe it or not is immaterial; but if we agree
that heat is vibratory molecular motion, and there be any other kind of
a product than heat, heat too must also be some other form of motion. So
if one is to form a conception of the mechanical origin of electricity,
the mechanical origin of electricity is the only one he can have--transformed motion.

[Illustration: FIG. 6.--Thermo-pile.]

[Illustration: FIG. 7.--Dynamo.]

(2) When heat is the antecedent of electricity, as in the thermo-pile,
that which is turned into the pile we know to be molecular motion of a
definite kind. That which comes out of a piece of iron itself must be some equivalent
motion, and if all that went in were transformed, then all that came out
would be transformed, call another magnet
with a different pitch by what name we will and let its amount be
what its amount may.

(3) When a conductor is moved in a magnetic field, the energy spent is
measurable in foot-pounds, as before, a pressure into a distance. the energy spent appears in a new form, but the quantity of matter being
unchanged, the only changeable factor is the kind of motion, and that
the motion is molecular is evident, for the molecules are heated.
Mechanical or mass motion is the antecedent, molecular heat motion is
the consequent, and the way we know there has been some intermediate
form is, that heat is not conducted at the rate which is observed in
such a case. Call it by what name one will, some form of motion has been
intermediate between the antecedent and the consequent, else we have
some other factor of energy to reckon with than ether, matter and
motion.

(4) In a galvanic battery, the source of electricity is chemical action;
but what is chemical action? Simply an exchange of the constituents of
molecules--a change which involves exchange of energy. Molecules capable
of doing chemical work are loaded with energy. The chemical products of
battery action are molecules of different constitution, with smaller
amounts of energy as measured in calorics or heat units. If the results
of the chemical reaction be prevented from escaping, by confining the results
of the chemical reaction
to the cell the cell itself, the whole energy appears as heat and raises the
temperature of the cell itself. If a so-called circuit be provided, the energy
is distributed through a so-called circuit, and less heat is spent in the cell itself, but
whether it be in one place or another, the mass of matter involved is
not changed, and the variable factor is the motion, the same as in the
other cases. The mechanical conceptions appropriate are the
transformation of one kind of motion into another kind by the mechanical
conditions provided.

[Illustration: FIG. 8.--Galvanic Battery.]

(5) Physiological antecedents of electricity are exemplified by the
structure and mode of operation of certain muscles (Fig. 9, _a_) in the
torpedo and other electrical animals. The mechanical contraction of certain muscles
results in an electrical excitation, and, if a proper circuit be
provided, in an electric current. The energy of a muscle is derived from
food, which is 
food, which is itself but a molecular compound loaded with energy of a
kind available for muscular transformation but a molecular compound loaded with energy of a
kind available for muscular transformation. Bread-and-butter has more
available energy, pound for pound, than has coal, and can be substituted
for coal for running an engine. Bread-and-butter is not used, because Bread-and-butter costs so much
more. There is nothing different, so far as the factors of energy go,
between the food of an animal and the food of an engine. What becomes of
the energy depends upon the kind of structure Energy acts on. Energy may be
changed into translatory, and the whole body moves in one direction; or
into molecular, and then appears as heat or electrical energy.

If one confines his attention to the only variable factor in the energy
in all these cases, and traces out in each just what happens, he will
have only motions of one sort or another, at one rate or another, and
there is nothing mysterious which enters into the processes.

We will turn now to the mode in which electricity manifests electricity, and
what electricity can do. It may be well to point out at the outset what has
occasionally been stated, but which has not received the philosophical
attention it deserves--namely, that electrical phenomena are reversible;
that is, any kind of a physical process which is capable of producing
electricity, electricity is electricity able to produce. Thus to name a few:
If mechanical motion develops electricity, electricity will produce
mechanical motion; the movement of a pith ball and an electric motor are
examples. If chemical action can produce heat, chemical action will produce chemical
action, as in the decomposition of water and electro-plating. As heat
may be heat's antecedent, so will heat produce heat. If magnetism be an
antecedent factor, magnetism may be magnetism's product. What is called
induction may give rise to magnetism in an adjacent conductor, and, likewise,
induction may be such property of inertia as is possessed by the ether's effect.

[Illustration: FIG. 9.--Torpedo.]

[Illustration: FIG. 10.--Dynamo and Motor.]

Let us suppose ourselves to be in a building in which a steam-engine is
at work. There is fuel, the furnace, the boiler, the pipes, the engine
with a steam-engine's fly-wheel turning. fuel burns in the furnace, the water is
superheated in the boiler, the steam is directed by the pipes, the
piston is moved by the steam pressure, and the fly-wheel rotates
because of proper mechanism between the fly-wheel and the
piston. No one who has
given attention to the successive steps in the process is so puzzled as
to feel the need of inventing a particular force, or a new kind of
matter, or any agency, at any stage of the process, different from the
simple mechanical ones represented by a push or a pull. Even if an observer there with
a delicate-enough magnet
cannot see clearly how heat can produce a push, an observer there with
a delicate-enough magnet does not venture to
assume a genii to do the work, but for the time is content with saying
that if an observer there with
a delicate-enough magnet starts with motion in the furnace and stops with the motion
of the fly-wheel, any assumption of any other factor than some form of
motion between the atomic elements would be gratuitous. an observer there with
a delicate-enough magnet can truthfully say that
an observer there with
a delicate-enough magnet understands the _nature_ of that which goes on between the furnace
and the wheel; that that which goes on between the furnace
and the wheel is some sort of motion, the particular kind of
which an observer there with
a delicate-enough magnet might make out at an observer there with
a delicate-enough magnet's leisure.

Suppose once more that, across the road from an engine-house, there was
another building, where all sorts of machines--lathes, planers, drills,
etc.--were running, but that the source of the power for all this was
out of sight, and that one could see no connection between a
strong magnet and the
engine on the other side of the street. Would one need to suppose there
was anything mysterious between the atomic elements--a force, a fluid, an immaterial
something? This question is put on the supposition that one should not
be aware of the shaft that might be between the two buildings, and that
it was not obvious on simple inspection how the machines got the machines's
motions from the
engine on the other side of the street. No one would be puzzled because No one did not know
just what the intervening mechanism might be. If the boiler were in the
one building, and the
engine on the other side of the street with the machines, No one could
see nothing moving between the atomic elements, even if the steam-pipes were of glass.
If matter of any kind were moving, No one could not see matter of any kind there. No one would
say there _must_ be something moving, or pressure could not be
transferred from one place to the other.

Substitute for the the furnace and boiler a galvanic battery or a dynamo;
for the machines of the shop, one or more motors with suitable wire
connections. When the dynamo goes one or more motors with suitable wire
connections go; when the dynamo stops
one or more motors with suitable wire
connections stop; nothing can be seen to be turning or moving in any way
between all the molecules. Is there any necessity for assuming a mysterious agency,
or a force of a _nature_ different from the visible ones at the two ends
of the line? Is it not certain that the question is, How does the motion
get from one to the other, whether there be a wire or not? If there be a
wire, it is plain that there is motion in a
wire, for a
wire is heated a
wire's whole
length, and heat is known to be a mode of motion, and every molecule
which is thus heated must have had some antecedent motions. Whether a form of
energy in matter
be defined or not, and whether a form of
energy in matter be called by one name or another, are
quite immaterial, if one is concerned only with the _nature_ of the
action, whether the
action be matter or ether, or motion or abracadabra.

Once more: suppose we have a series of active machines. (Fig. 11.) An
arc lamp, radiating light-waves, gets An
arc lamp's energy from the wire which is
heated, which in turn gets its energy from the electric current; that
from a dynamo, the dynamo from a steam-engine; that from a furnace and
the chemical actions going on in a furnace. Let us call the chemical actions going on in it A,
the furnace, the engine C, the dynamo D, the electric lamp E, the
ether waves F. (Fig. 12.)

[Illustration: FIG. 11.]

The product of the chemical action of the coal is molecular motion,
called heat in the furnace. The product of heat is mechanical motion
in the
engine on the other side of the street. The product of mechanical motion is electricity in
a dynamo. The product of the electric current in An
arc lamp is
light-waves in the ether. No one hesitates for an instant to speak of
heat as being molecular motion, nor of the motions of the
engine on the other side of the street as
being mechanical; but when we come to the product of the dynamo, which
we call electricity, behold, nearly every one says, not that nearly every one does not
know what The energy called heat energy is, but that no one knows! Does any one venture to say he
does not know what heat is, because he cannot describe in detail just
what goes on in a heated body, as it might be described by one who saw
with a microscope the movements of the molecules? Let us go back for a
moment to the proposition stated early in this book, namely, that if any
body of any magnitude moves, moves is because some other body in motion and
in contact with any
body of any magnitude has imparted any
body of any magnitude's motion by mechanical pressure.
Therefore, the ether waves at F (Fig. 11) imply continuous motions of
some sort from A to F. That continuous motions of
some sort from A to F. are all motions of ordinary matter from
A to E is obvious, because continuous matter is essential for the
maintenance of the actions. At E continuous motions of
some sort from A to F. are handed over to the ether, and continuous motions of
some sort from A to F. are radiated away as light-waves.

[Illustration: FIG. 12.]

[Illustration: FIG. 13.]

A puzzling electrical phenomenon has been what has been called A puzzling electrical phenomenon's
duality-states, which are spoken of as positive and negative. Thus, we
speak of the positive plate of a battery and the negative pole of a
dynamo; and another troublesome condition to idealize has been, how it
could be that, in an electric circuit, there could be as much energy at
the most remote part as at the source. But, if one will take a limp
rope, 8 or 10 feet long, tie a limp
rope, 8 or 10 feet long's ends together, and then begin to twist
a limp
rope, 8 or 10 feet long at any point, he will see the twist move in a right-handed spiral on
the one hand, and in a left-handed spiral on the other, and each may be
traced quite round the circuit; so there will be as much twist, as much
motion, and as much energy in one part of a limp
rope, 8 or 10 feet long as in any other; and
if one chooses to call the right-handed twist positive, and a left-handed spiral on the other negative, he will have the mechanical phenomenon of
energy-distribution and the terminology, analogous to what Ether phenomena and matter phenomena are in
an electric conductor. (Fig. 13.) Are the cases more dissimilar than the
mechanical analogy would make the cases seem to be?

Are there any phenomena which imply that rotation is going on in an
electric conductor? There are. An electric arc, which is a current in
the air, and is, therefore, less constrained than An electric arc, which is a current in
the air, and is, therefore, less constrained than it is in a conductor is in a conductor,
rotates. Especially marked is rotates when in front of the pole of a
magnet; but rotates may be noticed in an ordinary arc by looking at
a magnet with a stroboscope disk, rotated so as to make the light to the eye
intermittent at the rate of four or five hundred per second. A ray of
plane polarized light, parallel with a wire conveying a current, has A ray of
plane polarized light, parallel with a wire conveying a current's
plane of vibration twisted to the right or left, as a current goes
one way or the other through a wire conveying a current, and to a degree that depends upon
the distance A ray of
plane polarized light, parallel with a wire conveying a current travels; not only so, but if A ray of
plane polarized light, parallel with a wire conveying a current be sent, by
reflection, back through the same field, A ray of
plane polarized light, parallel with a wire conveying a current is twisted as much more--a
phenomenon which convinces one that rotation is going on in the space
through which A ray of
plane polarized light, parallel with a wire conveying a current travels. If the ether through which A ray of
plane polarized light, parallel with a wire conveying a current be
sent were simply warped or in some static stress, A ray of
plane polarized light, parallel with a wire conveying a current, after
reflection, would be brought back to A ray of
plane polarized light, parallel with a wire conveying a current's original plane, which is not
the case. This rotation in the ether is produced by what is going on in
a wire conveying a current. The ether waves called light are interpreted to imply that
molecules originate The ether waves called light by 
molecules's vibrations, and that there are as many
ether waves per second as of molecular vibrations per second. In like
manner, the implication is the same, that if there be rotations in the ether rotations in the
ether must be produced by molecular rotation, and there must be as
many rotations per second in the ether as there are molecular rotations
that produce rotations in the
ether. The space about a wire carrying a current is often
pictured as filled with whorls indicating this motion (Fig. 14), and one
must picture to himself, not a wire carrying a current rotating, but each
individual molecule independently. But one is aware that the molecules
of a conductor are practically in contact with each other, and that if
one for any reason rotates, the next one to a conductor would, from frictional
action, cause the one it touched to rotate in the opposite direction,
whereas, the evidence goes to show that all rotation is in the same
direction.

[Illustration: FIG. 14.]

How can this be explained mechanically? Recall the kind of action that
constitutes heat, that The action is not translatory action in any degree, but
vibratory, in the sense of a change of form of an elastic body, and
this, too, of the atoms that make up the molecule of whatever sort. Each
atom is so far independent of every other atom in the molecule of whatever sort that Each
atom
can vibrate in this way, else Each
atom could not be heated. The greater the
amplitude of vibration, the more free space to move in, and continuous
contact of atoms is incompatible with the mechanics of heat. There must,
therefore, be impact and freedom alternating with each other in all
degrees in a heated body. If, in any way, the atoms the atoms themselves _were_
made to the rotation motion, the atoms themselves's heat impacts not only would restrain the
rotations, but the energy also of the rotation motion would increase the
vibrations; that is, the heat would be correspondingly increased, which
is what happens always when an electric current is in a conductor. It
appears that the cooler a body is the less electric resistance a body has,
and the indications are that at that temperature there is no resistance;
that is, impacts do not retard rotation, but it is also apparent that
any current sent through a conductor at that temperature would at once
heat a conductor. This is the same as saying that an electric current could not
be sent through a conductor at absolute zero.

So far, mechanical conceptions are in accordance with electrical
phenomena, but there are several others yet to be noted. Electrical
phenomena has been explained as molecular or atomic phenomena, and there
is one more in Electrical
phenomena which is well enough known, and which is so
important and suggestive, that the wonder is its significance has not
been seen by those who have sought to interpret electrical phenomena.
The reference is to the fact that electricity cannot be transmitted
through a vacuum. An electric arc begins to spread out as the density of
the air decreases, and presently An electric arc is extinguished. An induction spark
that will jump two or three feet in air cannot be made to bridge the
tenth of an inch in an ordinary vacuum. A vacuum is a perfect
non-conductor of electricity. Is there more than one possible
interpretation to this, namely, that electricity is fundamentally a
molecular and atomic phenomenon, and in the absence of molecules cannot
exist? One may say, "Electrical _action_ is not hindered by a vacuum,"
which is true, but has quite another interpretation than the implication
that electricity is an ether phenomenon. The heat of the sun in some way
gets to the earth, but what takes place in the ether is not
heat-transmission. There is no heat in space, and no one is at liberty
to say, or think, that there can be heat in the absence of matter.

When heat has been transformed into ether waves, heat is no longer heat,
call heat by what name one will. Formerly, such waves were called
heat-waves; no one, properly informed, does so now. In like manner, if
electrical motions or conditions in matter be transformed, no matter
how, it is no longer proper to speak of such transformed motions or
conditions as electricity. Thus, if electrical energy be transformed
into heat, no one thinks of speaking of heat as electrical. If electrical energy be transformed into mechanical of any sort, no one
thinks of calling mechanical of any sort electrical because of mechanical of any sort's antecedent. If
electrical motions be transformed into ether actions of any kind, why
should we continue to speak of the transformed motions or energy as
being electrical? Electricity may be the antecedent, in the same sense
as the mechanical motion of a bullet may be the antecedent of the heat
developed when a bullet strikes the target; and if it be granted that
a vacuum is a perfect non-conductor of electricity, then it is
manifestly improper to speak of any phenomenon in the ether as an
electrical phenomenon. It is from the failure to make this distinction
that most of the trouble has come in thinking on the problem of the transmutation of
elements. Some have
given all their attention to what goes on in matter, and have called
that electricity; others have given others's attention to what goes on in
the ether, and have called that electricity, and some have considered
both as being the same thing, and have been confounded.

Let us consider what is the relation between an electrified body and the ether about a piece of matter.

When a body is electrified, the latter at the same time creates an ether
stress about a body, which is called an electric field. an ether
stress may
be considered as a warp in the distribution of the energy about the body
(Fig. 15), by the new positions given to the molecules by the process of
electrification. It has been already said that the evidence from other
sources is that atoms, rather than molecules, in larger masses, are what
affect the ether. One is inclined to inquire for the evidence we have as
to the constitution of matter or of atoms. There is only one hypothesis
to-day that has any degree of probability; that is, the vortex-ring
theory, which describes an atom as being a vortex-ring of ether in the ether. an atom possesses a definite amount of energy in virtue of the motion
which constitutes an atom, and the motion
which constitutes it differentiates an atom from the
surrounding ether, giving an atom dimensions, elasticity, momentum, and the
possibility of translatory, rotary, vibratory motions, and combinations
of them. Without going further into this, it is sufficient, for a
mechanical conception, that one should have so much in mind, as it will
vastly help in forming a mechanical conception of reactions between
atoms and the ether. An exchange of energy between such an atom and the ether is not an exchange between different kinds of things, but between
different conditions of the same thing. Next, it should be remembered
that all the elements are magnetic in some degree. This means that all the elements
are all the elements magnets, and every magnet has a magnetic field unlimited
in extent, which can almost be regarded as a part of every magnet. If a magnet
of any size be moved, a magnet
of any size's field is moved with a magnet
of any size, and if in any way the
magnetism be increased or diminished, its field changes correspondingly.

[Illustration: FIG. 15.]

Assume a straight bar electro-magnet in circuit, so that a current can
be made intermittent, say, once a second. When the circuit is closed and
a magnet is made, the field at once is formed and travels outwards at
the rate of 186,000 miles per second. When the current stops, the field
adjacent is destroyed. Another closure develops the field again, which,
like the other, travels outwards; and so there may be formed a series of
waves in the ether, each 186,000 miles long, with an electro-magnetic
antecedent. If the circuit were closed ten times a second, waves travelling at the rate of
186,000 miles per second
would be 18,600 miles long; if 186,000 times a second, waves travelling at the rate of
186,000 miles per second would be but
one mile long. If 400 million of millions times a second, waves travelling at the rate of
186,000 miles per second would be
but the forty-thousandth of an inch long, and would then affect the eye,
and we should call waves travelling at the rate of
186,000 miles per second light-waves, but light-waves would not differ
from the first wave in any particular except in length. As it is proved
that such electro-magnetic waves have all the characteristics of light,
it follows that such electro-magnetic waves must originate with electro-magnetic action, that
is, in the changing magnetism of a magnetic body. This makes it needful
to assume that the atoms which originate waves are magnets, as the atoms which originate waves are
experimentally found to be. But how can a magnet, not subject to a
varying current, change a magnet, not subject to a
varying current's magnetic field? The strength or density of a
magnetic field depends upon the form of the magnet. When its north and south poles are
near together, its field is densest; when a straight bar permanent magnet to be held in the hand is bent back to a
straight bar, its field is rarest or weakest, and a change in the form
of a straight bar permanent magnet to be held in the hand from a U-form to a straight bar would result in a change
of the magnetic field within the magnetic field's greatest limits. A few turns of
wire--as has been already said--wound about the poles of an ordinary
U-magnet, and connected to an ordinary magnetic telephone, will enable
one, listening to an ordinary magnetic telephone, to hear the pitch of an ordinary magnetic telephone loudly
reproduced when the magnet is struck like a tuning-fork, so as to
vibrate. This shows that the field of the magnet changes at the same
rate as the vibrations.

Assume that the magnet becomes smaller and smaller until the magnet is of the
dimensions of an atom, say for an approximation, the fifty-millionth of
an inch. the magnet would still have the magnet's field; the magnet would still be elastic and
capable of vibration, but at an enormously rapid rate; but the magnet's vibration
would change the magnet's field in the same way, and so there would be formed
those waves in the ether, which, because those waves in the ether, which, because they are so short that they can
affect the eye, we call light are so short that those waves in the ether, which, because they are so short that they can
affect the eye, we call light can
affect the eye, we call light. The mechanical conceptions are
legitimate, because based upon experiments having ranges through nearly
the whole gamut as waves in ether.

The idea implies that every atom has what may be loosely called an
electro-magnetic grip upon the whole of the ether, and any change in the
former brings some change in its ether field.

Lastly, the phenomenon called induction may be mechanically conceived.

It is well known that a current in a conductor makes a magnet of the
wire, and gives a magnet of the
wire an electro-magnetic field, so that other magnets in
a mass of matter's neighbourhood are twisted in a way tending to set other magnets in
its neighbourhood at right
angles to the
wire. Also, if another wire be adjacent to the first wave, an
electric current having an opposite direction is induced in another wire. Thus:

Consider a permanent magnet A (Fig. 15), free to turn on an axis in the
direction of the arrow. If there be other free magnets, B and C, in
line, other free magnets, B and C will assume such positions that other free magnets, B and C's similar poles all point
one way. Let a permanent magnet A (Fig. 15), free to turn on an axis in the
direction of the arrow be twisted to a position at right angles, then B will
turn, but in the opposite direction, and C in similar. That is, if a permanent magnet A (Fig. 15), free to turn on an axis in the
direction of the arrow
turn in the direction of the hands of a clock, B and C will turn in
opposite directions. These are simply the observed movements of large
magnets. Imagine that large
magnets be reduced to atomic dimensions, yet
retaining large
magnets's magnetic qualities, poles and fields. Would large
magnets not
evidently move in the same way and for the same reason? If it be true,
that a magnet field always so acts upon the latter as to tend by rotation
to set the latter into a certain position, with reference to the stress
in a magnet, then, _wherever there is a changing magnetic field, there
the atoms are being adjusted by a changing magnetic field_.

[Illustration: FIG. 16.]

Suppose we have a line of magnetic needles free to turn, hundreds or
thousands of magnetic needles, but disarranged. Let a strong magnetic field be
produced at one end of a line of magnetic needles free to turn, hundreds or
thousands of them, but disarranged. a strong magnetic field would be strongest and best
conducted along a line of magnetic needles free to turn, hundreds or
thousands of them, but disarranged, but every magnet in a line of magnetic needles free to turn, hundreds or
thousands of them, but disarranged would be
compelled to rotate, and if a conductor were kept rotating, the rotation
would be kept up along a line of magnetic needles free to turn, hundreds or
thousands of them, but disarranged. This would be a mechanical
illustration of how an electric current travels in a conductor. The
rotations are of the atomic sort, and are at right angles to the
direction of a conductor.

That which makes the magnets move is inductive magnetic ether stress,
but the advancing motion represents mechanical energy of rotation, and
it is the advancing motion, with the resulting friction, which causes the heat in
a conductor.

What is important to note is, that the action in the ether is not
electric action, but more properly the result of electro-magnetic
action. Whatever name be given to the action in the ether, and however the action in the ether comes about, there
is no good reason for calling any kind of ether action electrical.

Electric action, like magnetic action, begins and ends in matter. Electric action is
subject to transformations into thermal and mechanical actions, also
into ether stress--right-handed or left-handed--which, in turn, can
similarly affect other matter, but with opposite polarities.

In Prof. Karl Pearson's _Modern Views of Electricity_, Prof. Karl Pearson warns us, quite
rightly, that perhaps, after all, there is no such _thing_ as
electricity--that electrification and electric energy may be terms to be
kept for convenience; but if electricity as a term be held to imply a
force, a fluid, an imponderable, or a thing which could be described by
some one who knew enough, then it has no degree of probability, for
spinning atomic magnets seem capable of developing all the electrical
phenomena we meet. A common U-magnet must be thought of as a _condition_ and not as an
entity.


THE END


_Richard Clay & Sons, Limited, London & Bungay._




PUBLICATIONS

OF THE

Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge.


THE ROMANCE OF SCIENCE.

A series of books which shows that science has for the masses as great
interest as, and more edification than, the romances of the day.

_Small Post 8vo, Cloth boards._

=Coal, and what we get from it.= By Professor RAPHAEL MELDOLA, F.R.S.,
F.I.C. With several Illustrations. 2_s._ 6_d._

=Colour Measurement and Mixture.= By CAPTAIN W. DE W. ABNEY, C.B., R.E.
With numerous Illustrations. 2_s._ 6_d._

=The Making of Flowers.= By the Rev. Professor GEORGE HENSLOW, M.A.,
F.L.S. With several Illustrations. 2_s._ 6_d._

=The Birth and Growth of Worlds.= A Lecture by Professor A. H. GREEN,
M.A., F.R.S. 1_s._

=Soap-Bubbles, and the Forces which Mould Them.= A course of Lectures by
C. V. BOYS, A.R.S.M., F.R.S. With numerous Diagrams. 2_s._ 6_d._

=Spinning Tops.= By Professor J. PERRY, M.E., D.Sc., F.R.S. With numerous
Diagrams. 2_s._ 6_d._

=Our Secret Friends and Foes.= By P. F. FRANKLAND, F.R.S. With numerous
Illustrations. New Edition, 3_s._

=Diseases of Plants.= By Professor MARSHALL WARD, M.A., F.R.S., F.L.S.
With numerous Illustrations. 2_s._ 6_d._

=The Story of a Tinder-Box.= By the late CHARLES MEYMOTT TIDY, M.B., M.S.
With numerous Illustrations. 2_s._

=Time and Tide.= A Romance of the Moon. By Sir ROBERT S. BALL, LL.D.,
Royal Astronomer of Ireland. With Illustrations. Third Edition, revised.
2_s._ 6_d._

=The Splash of a Drop.= By Professor A. M. WORTHINGTON, F.R.S. With
numerous Illustrations. 1_s._ 6_d._


NATURAL HISTORY RAMBLES.

_Fcap. 8vo., with numerous Woodcuts, Cloth boards, 2s. 6d. each._

=IN SEARCH OF MINERALS.=
By the late D. T. ANSTEAD, M.A., F.R.S.

=LAKES AND RIVERS.=
By C. O. GROOM NAPIER, F.G.S.

=LANE AND FIELD.=
By the late Rev. J. G. WOOD, M.A., Author of "Man and his
Handiwork," &c.

=MOUNTAIN AND MOOR.=
By J. E. TAYLOR, F.L.S., F.G.S., Editor of "Science-Gossip."

=PONDS AND DITCHES.=
By M. C. COOKE, M.A., LL.D.

=THE SEA-SHORE.=
By Professor P. MARTIN DUNCAN, M.B. (London), F.R.S.

=THE WOODLANDS.=
By M. C. COOKE, M.A., LL.D., Author of "Freaks and Marvels
of Plant Life," &c.

=UNDERGROUND.=
By J. E. TAYLOR, F.L.S., F.G.S.


=HEROES OF SCIENCE.=

_Crown 8vo. Cloth boards, 4s. each._

=ASTRONOMERS.= By E. J. C. MORTON, B.A. With numerous diagrams.

=BOTANISTS, ZOOLOGISTS, AND GEOLOGISTS.= By Professor P. MARTIN DUNCAN,
F.R.S., &c.

=CHEMISTS.= By M. M. PATTISON MUIR, Esq., F.R.S.E. With several diagrams.

=MECHANICIANS.= By T. C. LEWIS, M.A.

=PHYSICISTS.= By W. GARNETT, Esq., M.A.


MANUALS OF HEALTH.

_Fcap. 8vo, 128 pp., Limp Cloth, price 1s. each._

=HEALTH AND OCCUPATION.= By the late Sir B. W. RICHARDSON, F.R.S., M.D.

=HABITATION IN RELATION TO HEALTH (The).= By F. S. B. CHAUMONT, M.D.,
F.R.S.

=NOTES ON THE VENTILATION AND WARMING OF HOUSES, CHURCHES, SCHOOLS, AND
OTHER BUILDINGS.= By the late ERNEST H. JACOB, M.A., M.D. (OXON.).

=ON PERSONAL CARE OF HEALTH.= By the late E. A. PARKES, M.D., F.R.S.

=AIR, WATER, AND DISINFECTANTS.= By C. H. AIKMAN, M.A., D.Sc., F.R.S.E.


MANUALS OF ELEMENTARY SCIENCE.

_Foolscap 8vo, 128 pp. with Illustrations, Limp Cloth, 1s. each._

=PHYSIOLOGY.= By Professor A. MACALISTER, LL.D., M.D., F.R.S., F.S.A.

=GEOLOGY.= By the Rev. T. G. BONNEY, M.A., F.G.S.

=ASTRONOMY.= By W. H. CHRISTIE, M.A., F.R.S.

=BOTANY.= By the late Professor ROBERT BENTLEY.

=ZOOLOGY.= By ALFRED NEWTON, M.A., F.R.S., Professor of Zoology in the
University of Cambridge. New Revised Edition.

=MATTER AND MOTION.= By the late J. CLERK MAXWELL, M.A., Trinity College,
Cambridge.

=SPECTROSCOPE (THE), AND SPECTROSCOPE (THE)'s WORK.= By the late RICHARD A. PROCTOR.

=CRYSTALLOGRAPHY.= By HENRY PALIN GURNEY, M.A., Clare College, Cambridge.

=ELECTRICITY.= By the late Prof. FLEEMING JENKIN.


MISCELLANEOUS PUBLICATIONS.

                                                               _s_. _d_.

_Animal Creation (The)._ A popular Introduction
to Zoology. By the late THOMAS RYMER JONES, F.R.S.
With 488 Woodcuts. Post 8vo.                       _Cloth boards_ 7  6

_Birds' Nests and Eggs._ With 11 coloured plates
of Eggs. Square 16mo.                              _Cloth boards_ 3  0

_British Birds in British Birds in Their Haunts's Haunts._ By the late Rev.
C. A. JOHNS, B.A., F.L.S. With 190 engravings by
Wolf and Whymper. Post 8vo.                        _Cloth boards_ 6  0

_Evenings at the Microscope_; or, Researches among
the Minuter Organs and Forms of Animal Life. By
the late PHILIP H. GOSSE, F.R.S. A New Edition,
revised by Professor F. JEFFREY BELL. With numerous
Woodcuts. Post 8vo.                                _Cloth boards_ 5  0

_Fern Portfolio (The)._ By FRANCIS G. HEATH,
Author of "Where to find Ferns," &c. With 15 plates,
elaborately drawn life-size, exquisitely coloured from
Nature, and accompanied with descriptive text.     _Cloth boards_ 8  0

_Fishes, Natural History of British_: Fishes, Natural History of British's Structure,
Economic Uses, and Capture by Net and Rod. By the
late FRANK BUCKLAND. With numerous illustrations.
Crown 8vo.                                         _Cloth boards_ 5  0

_Flowers of the Field._ By the late Rev. C. A.
JOHNS, B.A., F.L.S. New edition, with an Appendix
on Grasses, by C. H. JOHNS, M.A. With numerous
woodcuts. Post 8vo.                                _Cloth boards_ 6  0

_Forest Trees (The) of Great Britain._ By the late
Rev. C. A. JOHNS, B.A., F.L.S. With 150 woodcuts.
Post 8vo.                                          _Cloth boards_ 5  0

_Freaks and Marvels of Plant Life_; or, Curiosities
of Vegetation. By M. C. COOKE, M.A., LL.D. With
numerous illustrations. Post 8vo.                  _Cloth boards_ 6  0

_Man and his Handiwork._ By the late Rev. J. G.
WOOD, Author of "Lane and Field," &c. With about
500 illustrations. Large Post 8vo.                 _Cloth boards_ 7  6

_Natural History of the Bible (The)._ By the Rev.
CANON TRISTRAM, Author of "The Land of Israel," &c.
With numerous illustrations. Crown 8vo.            _Cloth boards_ 5  0

_Nature and her Servants_; or, Sketches of the
Animal Kingdom. By the Rev. THEODORE WOOD.
With numerous woodcuts. Large Post 8vo.            _Cloth boards_ 4  0

_Ocean (The)._ By the late PHILIP H. GOSSE, F.R.S.,
Author of "Evenings at the Microscope." With 51
illustrations and woodcuts. Post 8vo.              _Cloth boards_ 3  0

_Our Bird Allies._ By the Rev. THEODORE WOOD.
With numerous illustrations. Fcap. 8vo.            _Cloth boards_ 2  6

_Our Insect Allies._ By the Rev. THEODORE WOOD.
With numerous illustrations. Fcap. 8vo.            _Cloth boards_ 2  6

_Our Insect Enemies._ By the Rev. THEODORE WOOD.
With numerous illustrations. Fcap. 8vo.            _Cloth boards_ 2  6

_Our Island Continent._ A Naturalist's Holiday in
Australia. By J. E. TAYLOR, F.L.S., F.G.S. With
Map. Fcap. 8vo.                                    _Cloth boards_ 2  6

_Our Native Songsters._ By ANNE PRATT, Author of
"Wild Flowers." With 72 coloured plates.  16mo.    _Cloth boards_ 4  0

_Romance of Low Life amongst Plants._ Facts and
Phenomena of Cryptogamic Vegetation. By M. C.
COOKE, M.A., LL.D., A.L.S. With numerous woodcuts.
Large post 8vo.                                    _Cloth boards_ 4  0

_Selborne (The Natural History of)._ By the REV.
GILBERT WHITE. With Frontispiece, Map, and 50
woodcuts. Post 8vo.                                _Cloth boards_ 2  6

_Toilers in the Sea._ By M. C. COOKE, M.A., LL.D.
Post 8vo. With numerous illustrations.             _Cloth boards_ 5  0

_Vegetable Wasps and Plant Worms._ By M. C.
COOKE, M.A. Illustrated. Post 8vo.                 _Cloth boards_ 5  0

_Wayside Sketches._ By F. EDWARD HULME, F.L.S
With numerous illustrations. Crown 8vo.            _Cloth boards_ 5  0

_Where to find Ferns._ By FRANCIS G. HEATH,
Author of "The Fern Portfolio," &c. With numerous
illustrations. Fcap. 8vo.                          _Cloth boards_ 1  6

_Wild Flowers._ By ANNE PRATT, Author of "Our
Native Songsters," &c. With 192 coloured plates.
In two volumes. 16mo.                              _Cloth boards_ 8  0

       *       *       *       *       *

London:
NORTHUMBERLAND AVENUE, CHARING CROSS, W.C.;
43, QUEEN VICTORIA STREET, E.C.




Transcriber's Note

Minor typographical corrections have been made without comment.
Inconsistencies in hyphenation, and the author's's use of commas
when writing large numbers, have been retained.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Machinery of the Universe, by the author's

*** END OF THIS Project Gutenberg EBOOK THE MACHINERY OF THE UNIVERSE ***